                     THE ADOLESCENCE CEREMONY


The Sun was the one who arranged the ceremony for unclean women. She
(Ests'unnadlehi) sat thus on her knees and the red light from the sun
shone into her. She was living alone.

When she becomes a woman they straighten her. The people stand in a line
and sing while the drum is beaten. They dance four nights. They paint
her with white clay that she may live a long time, and that her hair may
get white on one side of her head. They put up a cane with a curved top
for her around which she is to run. At one side a basket stands in which
there is tobacco and on the other side a basket containing corn.

When she has run around the cane in its first position, it is put up
again farther away, where she runs around it again and returns to the
line of singers. Again, the cane and basket of corn are moved out and
the girl runs around them. When she returns to the singers she dances,
having a downy feather tied at the crown of her head. The cane is put up
again and the basket of corn moved once more. The girl runs around them
returning to the singers. This cane is said to be the sun's cane and the
chief's cane.

The corn is poured from the basket over the crown of the girl's head.
The people all try to get a handful of the corn. After that, she throws
the blankets in every direction and the people pick them up, saying,
“May her blankets be many.” They plant the corn and all say they raise
large crops in consequence.

They prepare Gans and dance four nights. They do not allow anyone to
sleep during the dancing.

The girl, Ests'unnadlehi, has a skirt and a shirt of dressed skin. The
shirt is spoken of as fringed shirt and the skirt, a fringed skirt.

When the Gans dance, the girl dances behind them. She does not sleep
during the four nights.

On the morning after the fourth night all the people gather around to
insure good luck in the future. The sun's songs, the chief's songs, are
sung and with them they dance. After the four nights they paint the girl
white with gypsum mixed with water which is in a shallow basket. The
girl stands here and a woman whose husband is rich in horses and other
property stirs the gypsum and water with a hairbrush. She applies this
white mixture to the girl's head, and brushes her downward until she is
whitened all over. The girl then sprinkles the men, women, and children
who stand around in a large circle. This is done that they may be
fortunate in the future. If some of the white mixture falls on the hair,
that person will have gray hair at that spot.






