                            DEER WOMAN


After he married, they went on a hunting trip. When they had established
camp where they were to get the deer meat, the man went out to hunt, but
the woman stayed at the camp. As the husband left, he said, if anyone
came from the north, that would be himself, but if someone came from the
east it would be someone else.

Then Ganłjine came there carrying a deer mask in his hand which he put
on the brush of which the camp was made, and sat down by the fire. The
deer mask was eating as if it were alive and it made a noise like a
deer. Ganłjine told the woman to put on the thing which was lying there.
She replied that a deer mask was something to be afraid of. “Put it on
and let me look at it,” he insisted. “Will it be all right?” she asked
him. He told her to put it on anyway, and stand at one side so he could
look at it. She put it on and stood at the place designated in the
posture of a deer.

He threw a turquoise ring on her, and she became like a deer as far as
her neck. Then he threw a ring of _bacinϵ_ on her and an additional
portion of her body changed to a deer. Next he threw a ring of
_tcϵłtcϵϵ_, and last, one of _yołgai_. She was then completely like a
deer and walked away, wiggling her tail.

Toward the east there are mountains called Iłijgo. There are four
mountains standing in a line, one back of the other. She who used to be
a woman and Ganłjine went there together. They were mating as they went
along, as could be told from the tracks. Deer tracks were in one place
and nearby, other deer tracks, but on one side a man's tracks. They went
toward the east.

When the husband came back he saw by the tracks that a man had visited
the camp and had gone away with his wife. He went back to the settlement
and told them that the woman with whom he had gone to hunt had gone off,
leaving human tracks on one side and on the other side like a deer.

The people went in a company to the place where the man had camped and
commenced following the tracks that were human on one side and deer-like
on the other. While being trailed they ran from those who were following
them, who ran after them, chasing them around until the one who had been
a woman was worn out. They overtook her and threw on her a ring of
turquoise, followed by one of _bacinϵ_ and then one of _tcϵłtcϵϵ_, and
finally one of _yołgai_. As these rings fell on her she became
progressively human in shape. When she had become a human being again,
they took her back to the settlement. When it was time for deer to run
again, she became a deer once more, and then became a person again.

When thunder was heard, they made a camp and went to hunt little fawns
which they were bringing into the camp. This woman who had turned into a
deer had little fawns which she had borne for a deer. She went around
among the houses where the fawns were being brought in and found her own
lying there dead. An Indian had killed them both and had brought them
in. When she learned a man had brought in pretty fawns, with yellow
around their eyes, she ran there and commenced to cry.

She spoke, saying that the deer they should see along the trail where
she went with her children would be herself and that they should pray to
her.






