                       HE WHO BECAME A SNAKE


A man (Naiyenezgani) was living alone. He brought wood there and built a
fire. He danced on rawhide against white men and then went to war. He
came where the white people were and killed a white woman. He raised up
her skirt with a stick and Gila monster was there. “Let that be your
name,” he said and Gila Monster was called _łenellai_. The two of them
started back and came to a mountain called Bitcilł'ehe. From there they
went back and came to a place called Tsitena'a. A porcupine was there
and one of the men said, “My cousin, a porcupine lies here.” They killed
it and buried it in the ashes of the fire. At midnight he uncovered it,
but Naiyenezgani did not eat of it, only his partner. “My cousin, it
tastes like red peppers, taste it,” he said. They lay down again and
went to sleep. The next morning there were traces where the one who had
eaten had crawled into the water as a snake. Naiyenezgani went back from
there and in the yellow light of evening came back to Tatakawa,
saying, “Since early this morning I came from Tsitena'a.” When all the
people had come together they asked, “What place is called that?”
“Big-hawk-old-man says he has been all over earth and seen
everything. Send for him,” they said. When he was summoned, he came
walking with his cane and sat down. “You are accustomed to say you have
seen every place on earth. A man says he has come from Tsitena'a since
early this morning,” they told him. “Well, it is not near. I flew from
there in ten days and when I came here the yellow light of sunset was
over the earth.”

Naiyenezgani then said, “He stayed with me last night and he ate
something. It seems he turned into a snake and crawled in the river.”

All the Eagle people, Black Whirlwind, the Sun, the Moon, and the Gan
people all started toward Tsitena'a. When they came there, in the
presence of the Sun and Moon, Black Gan rolled a turquoise hoop into the
water. The water of the river rose up so much. Then Ganłbaiye rolled a
hoop of _bacinϵ_ into the water. Next Gan with his face half covered
rolled a hoop of _tsϵłtcϵϵ_ in the water and the river was lifted up so
much (about a yard). Finally, Ganłtci' rolled a hoop of _yołgai_ and the
water was high enough above the river bed that a man could walk under
it.

They all entered the bed of the river and followed the man who had
turned into a snake. They finally overtook him. There was a snake on
the other side which they concluded was the one who had been a man. A
turquoise hoop was rolled toward him and it jumped over his neck. From
the neck up he took on the appearance of a man. A hoop of _bacinϵ_ was
next rolled and it fell to the waist. Next a loop of _tcϵłtcϵϵ_ was
rolled which jumped on the man and fell to the hips, above which he
took the form of a man. Finally a hoop of _yołgai_ was rolled, and his
entire body became human. Then they took him by the hand and led him
back. They danced for him twelve nights and he was restored as a man.
During the twelve nights, no one was allowed to sleep, but someone did
fall asleep. The one who had turned into a snake began to sing, “I am
going up. I am going up where the sky comes together,” he said as he
sang. He was no longer seen where he had been standing. The man had a
sister who began to sing. “Truly, I am going where it is called,
mesquites-come-together.” She was no longer where she had been
standing.

She is the one who crawls around here in the summertime. The female
lives below; the male lives above.

It was here the Indians secured the supernatural power. Naiyenezgani
alone had the _najonc_ poles. He alone played with them. There were two
of the poles.

My yucca fruits lie this way.










