            THE MAN WHO VISITED THE SKY WITH THE EAGLES


Long ago, there was a man who had a wife and two children, both boys. He
went with Coyote on a hunting trip and camped near where they expected
to secure game. He went out to hunt in the morning; and Coyote also went
by himself and, as he was walking along, he came where there was an
eagle's nest on a point of rock jutting out in the middle of a high
cliff. There were young eagles in the nest.

Coyote returned to the camp and reported to the hunter that he had seen
young eagles in a nest. Saying he wished some good feathers for
feathering arrows, he asked the other man to lower him from the top of
the cliff to the nest. When they had come to the place, Coyote asked the
other man to allow himself to be lowered and to throw the feathers down
for him. Coyote lowered him, asking if he had come to the young eagles.
The reply was, “Not yet.” A little later, the same question was repeated
and the answer this time was, “Yes.” Coyote then let the rope fall on
the man saying, “Cousin, she who was your wife will be mine.”

The man then sat with the young eagles. He asked what sort of weather
prevailed when their father returned. They replied that a “male” rain
fell. Soon a “male” rain fell and the father of the young eagles
flew back in the rain. When he came where the man was sitting with the
young eagles, he asked who was there. The man replied that Coyote had
lowered him and that he was hovering his children for him. The male bird
told him he might remain there and flew off.

The man then asked the young birds in what sort of weather their mother
came back. They said she returned when a “female” rain was falling. Soon
a “female” rain fell and the eagle's wife returned. She asked the man
who he was; he told her that Coyote had lowered him down there and that
he was staying with her children. Now she told him he might remain there
and departed.

The male bird came back accompanied by a “male” rain. He brought with
him a water vessel made of turquoise and bade the man drink. He drank
and the water was not exhausted although the vessel of turquoise was
very small.

Accompanied by a “female” rain the female bird returned and perched
nearby. She put down a horn vessel of boiled corn and invited the man to
eat it. It was a small vessel, but it was not empty when he had finished
his meal.

She flew away again and after four days the eagle people all assembled.
They gave him an eagle shirt and instructed him to do as they did. He
put on the shirt and flew a little way with it. He put on one shirt
after another and flew farther and farther each time, four times. He was
a man but he became an eagle.

     “Where am I going?” he asked.
     “Where the black mirage is located at the center of the sky, I go
        up.
 In the shadow of his dark wings, I come.
     “Where the blue mirage is located at the center of the sky, I go up.
 In the shadow of his blue wings, I come.
     “Where the yellow mirage is located at the center of the sky, I go
        up.
 In the shadow of the yellow wings, I come.
     “Where the white mirage is located at the center of the sky, I go
        up.
 In the shadow of the white wings, I come,” he sang.
     “Between the two who sit on the white sky, I go up. Where the white
        weeds tower up, white on the sky at its center, I go up,” he
        sang.
     “Where the dark houses of the eagles project, I come,” he sang.
     “Where the blue houses of eagles project, I go up.
     “Where the red houses of the eagles project, I go up.
     “Where the white houses of the eagles project, I go up,” he sang.

He lay down where there were no habitations. They asked him in vain to
come inside the building, for soon the person with a skull that kills
would come.

Saying he would remain there, he refused, and lay down. In the night, he
heard the one with a skull that kills coming. He took up a stone and hit
him with it as he walked by and killed him. He also killed the bees that
had caused the eagles to die out by stinging them. He took the bees from
their nests and killed them all. He killed, too, the wasps that lived in
rocks, and all the yellow jackets. The tumble weeds, also, were killing
the eagles by rolling on them. He beat these weeds with a stick and
destroyed them.

He inquired of an old eagle woman where others were living. She told him
of wood-rats which have many houses and bring back much material when
they go abroad. He went where cactus was standing and when night came,
lay down to sleep. He heard the sound of people shouting toward the
east. They were saying, “Down here.” They were chasing an insect called
_agetdlic_. He killed it.

The stars were people and were coming to get arrows. Those who were
running after _agetdlic_ jumped over his body one by one as they reached
it. The last one who was running succeeded in jumping over the body but
fell back on it.

They removed the skin, cut up meat, tied it up, and put it on the man's
back for him to carry. They warned him against looking back. He started
away with it and carried it until he came to the top of a hill.
Wondering why he had been told not to look back, he did so and fell over
backward. He went to the camp of the eagles and told them his load was
on the hill. They went to get the load and brought it to the camp. There
was a big pile of the meat which they brought back. “This was what he
meant,” they said. It was sunset by the time they brought the meat back.

“The man is a good helper,” they said. “He has killed for us all those
who used to kill us.” The man then said he was going home, and the eagle
people told him he might do so. They told him, though, that if he was
afraid four times to fly down, that he could not go down. He was afraid
the fourth time and came back saying that he would start home again on
the fourth day.

They went with him to the place where the trail came up. He was afraid
three times, but when it was to be the fourth time he flew down.

“Where the white mirage is located in the center of the sky he rested;
where the yellow house stands, resting in its shadow he sat down.

“The blue house, standing at the center of the sky; resting in the shade
he sat down again.

“The black house, standing at the center of the sky; resting in its
shade he sat down again.”

From there he flew down and lit on the earth. He alighted on a tree near
which sat the Coyote who had lowered him. He was saying he would shoot
the eagle there and get feathers to fix his arrow's. When Coyote tried
to steal up close under him the eagle flew away to his house and became
a man again. Those, who used to be his children had been renamed, “They
grew up by eating the neck.” Coyote had punched their eyes out. “He did
it with an awl,” they told their father.

When he came back from hunting, his two children had been all right. He
heard him bring his load as he came back. He was saying,
“Raised-with-neck-meat, come and meet me.” “Do not go there,” he told
his sons. Coyote kept shouting as he came. He brought the load there and
threw it down. He called out. “Good, Cousin. You have come back? I took
good care of your children.”

The man who had been with the eagles then told his wife to put four
stones on the fire. She put them on the fire to heat. She put one here
and one here. “Put two of the stones in your mouth and put your feet on
these two,” he told Coyote. Coyote did as he was told to, but ran only a
little way before his tail fell out. His wife had an ill odor from being
with Coyote. He beat among Coyote's children with a stick.

He did not like living on the earth. He placed eagle plumes in a row
which multiplied fourfold. With the aid of these the man became an
eagle. The people living here came to have medicinemen with power from
eagles. He was a man but became an eagle and is now in the sky above.








