            THE GAMBLER WHO SECURED THE WATER-CEREMONY


A boy started playing _najonc_ and lost his arrows, his moccasins, his
breechcloth, his shirt, his headband, his hair, his eyebrows, and his
eyelashes. When he returned home so divested, his mother told him to go
away somewhere that she might not see him again.

He started away, utterly naked as he was, and traveled until he came to
the edge of the ocean. He jumped into the water but was thrown back.
He did this three times with the same result and then jumped in under
the water. When he looked back through the water it was white. He began
to eat all kinds of “worms” as he went along. He ate, also, some of the
green growth floating on the water. They came with him to the house made
of water. The fly that sat inside his ear gave him information and
advice. All the water people and the fog people went with him;
Water-old-man was among them and Water-youth with a downy feather on the
crown of his head. He was sent down that way with a message. They
sent him where the black blanket of water is spread down.

“Over there he is running along,” someone said. “Now to you they are
starting, Water-youths, to you they are starting. Yonder we are coming,
Water-youths are coming,” he said. “They are coming right up the stream.

“Fog-youths are coming, right in front of the fog they are coming.

“Where the water stands straight up, next to him, the water people are
coming to us. With water-downy-feathers as their feathers they are
coming to us; holding the lightning in their hands they are coming to
us.

“Where the fog stands straight up, standing next to me, they come to
us,” he said. “Fog-youths come to us,” he said. “At the end of the
water, they come to us. Having downy feathers of fog they come to us;
holding the lightning in their hands they come to us.”

The one who became water came by the house made of fog and water. “Where
is the place called 'House-of-water'?” he asked. “This place is called
'House-of-water'” the water people replied. His monitor, fly, told him
they were not telling him the truth. He came to the house made of water.
“Where is the place called 'House-of-water'?” he asked. It was Water
Chief to whom he came. “It is called 'Water-house' right here,” he
replied. His fly told him that was correct; that 'Water-house' was
there.

Two vessels filled with water which was boiling, were by the fire.
“Drink all there is in one of the vessels,” he was told by Water Chief.
He drank the contents of one vessel and then vomited. He was saying,
“wa, wa,” as he vomited. He threw up all of the underwater “worms.”

They bathed him with the contents of the other vessel. They commenced to
dance and danced for twelve nights without sleeping. When they had
danced twelve nights without his falling asleep they told him he might
go home.

Then Naiyenezgani danced there among them. His hat was white on top. He
held his hand outspread over him as he stood by him. Water-old-man, too,
danced among them. Water-house was on this side.

“Water-youths all came here where they were dancing. With their downy
feathers of water they came there. They came to the dance ground holding
lightning in their hands.

“From 'House-made-of-fog,' Fog-girls came where they danced having their
downy feathers of fog. They held lightning in their hands.

“Water-youths were behind them, pretty, they were behind them; having
their downy feathers of water, they were behind them. Holding lightning
in their hands, they were all behind them.

“The Fog-girls came from the house made of fog. Having downy feathers of
fog, they danced with fog. All holding lightning in their hands, the
dance being made of fog they started to dance with him.

“They danced with the boy who became water.”

Naiyenezgani danced among them. When they were looking somewhere else
Naiyenezgani became a baby again, and was tied in a basket cradle. The
attention of the people was attracted elsewhere and when they saw
Naiyenezgani again he was standing among the Water-maidens to whom he
did various things.

Tobatc'istcini, too, was tied as a baby, then the two men did various
things to them. The twelve nights had passed without anyone sleeping. He
stood between the Water-maidens. The men from a distance made a circle
and danced. The Water-people danced with him. The Fog-people danced with
him.

The Sun was present there. From so great a height he looked down on
them. They danced in his presence. They danced, too, in the presence of
the Moon. When twelve nights had passed and it was the twelfth morning
he went to sleep. Far off, a Water-maiden stood. He, who became water,
stood here and there stood a Fog-maiden. When twelve nights had passed
he fell asleep. He loved this one. They shouted to him saying, “You are
falling asleep.” The one standing behind him stepped by his foot and he
fell against him.

    Bił'olisn was there where they were dancing.
    “He took her away, where the land is beautiful with corn.
    “Fog-maiden; where the land is beautiful with pumpkins.
    “Bił'olisn; where the land is beautiful with large corn, they two
       went.
    “Fog-maiden; where the land is beautiful with large pumpkins, they
       two went.
    “Bił'olisn; where the land is beautiful with large corn, they two
       sat down.
    “Fog-maiden; where the land is beautiful with large pumpkins, they
       two sat down.
    “Bił'olisn; where the land is beautiful with large corn, they two
       lay down.
    “Fog-maiden; where the land is beautiful with pumpkins, they two lay
       down.

“At the east where the black water lies, stands the large corn, with
staying roots, its large stalk, its red silk, its long leaves, its
tassel dark and spreading, on which there is dew.

“At the sunset, where the yellow water lies, stands the large pumpkin
with its tendrils, its long stem, its wide leaves, its yellow top on
which there is pollen.”

This all happened where the man turned to water. He came back here where
people were living. His mother had her hair cut off and was weeping for
him. He came back at the end of a year. His younger brother was walking
outdoors and saw him. When he saw him coming back he said, “Mother, over
there my brother is returning.” “Evil one, why do you say that?” she
replied. “I am telling the truth, my brother is coming. Come here and
look,” the boy said. She came out and found it was true. She called him
her son, and told him she had been having a hard time and had cried on
his account.

He went and hunted deer in company with his brother. He asked his
brother to hunt in a certain direction and circle around to him again.
There were thunder showers. The young man was sitting by himself. In one
direction it was raining, it was black with the falling rain.

“I wish I might drink water again on top where black rain stands up. I
wish I might drink water again on top where the water stands up.” His
brother returned and surprised him while he was still singing.

They went back again to the house and the boy told them that his brother
had been singing. He was told there were no songs and that he was not
speaking the truth. He reaffirmed his statement. He asked that a
sweathouse be built. When it was ready the boys went in and were singing
inside. The young man who had been turned into water started to sing the
water songs. Inside he wove lightning together again. There had been no
water songs and now they existed. Thus, there came to be medicinemen for
water.












