A WISE WEAVER


A king was once sitting upon his throne when an embassador from
a distant country approached, drew a line around the throne, and
sat down without speaking a word. The King did not understand this
mystery. He called his ministers. They also did not understand it. It
was a disgrace to the King that he did not have a man wise enough to
understand the symbolical message of a neighboring sovereign. The
King was very angry, and ordered his ministers to solve the riddle
themselves, or to find some one in the city to solve it immediately;
otherwise he would put them all to death. Thereupon the ministers
began to search through the realm for a wise man. After a long quest
they came to a certain house, which they entered. There was no one in
the first room but a baby sleeping in a cradle. And strange to say,
the cradle was rocking without any visible cause. They entered the
adjacent room, and lo! there also was a baby sleeping in a cradle,
which was rocking, though no one was in the room. They walked out
into the back yard, where they saw wheat washed and spread to dry;
there was a cane moving to and fro, driving away the sparrows, in
order that they might not eat the wheat. The ministers of the King
were surprised, and going down into the cellar they found a weaver
weaving cloth. As his wife had died soon, after giving birth to twins,
he had both to weave for his living and do a housewife's work and
nurse his children. He therefore had connected the two cradles and
the sparrow driver to his loom and shuttle with cords; and so, in
this manner, by virtue of his cleverness he was performing all his
duties without much trouble. The ministers thought that this man might
solve the King's riddle, and so they told him what had happened. The
weaver thought a while and then taking a couple of marbles and a
chicken, went with the ministers. Entering the presence of the King,
he looked the foreign embassador in the face, and threw before him
the marbles. The embassador took from his pocket a handful of grain
and spread it on the floor. The weaver put down the chicken, which
in a few minutes ate all the grain. Thereupon the embassador put on
his sandals and ran away speedily.

"What was all this?" asked the King.

"By drawing the line around the throne," answered the weaver, "the
embassador wished to say that their King was coming to besiege us,
if we did not humiliate ourselves and pay tribute. To this I answered
by dropping marbles, which meant that they were children compared to
ourselves and that they would better go and play marbles, rather than
to undertake a war which would result in their utter ruin. By spreading
the handful of grain he meant that their forces were innumerable. By
the chicken which ate all the grain, I meant that a company of ours
was enough to destroy a legion of theirs."

The King was pleased with the weaver, and gave him costly presents,
but the weaver took only a little to enable him to bring up his
beloved twins. The King wanted to make him his prime minister, but
the weaver declined, saying:

"Let me continue to be a weaver; only I beg you to remember, that
wisdom and understanding are not distributed according to rank and
that the common tradesmen are entitled to be treated as humanely as
your peers and noblemen."







MIND OR LUCK--WHICH?


Mind and Luck were one day debating.

"It is only by me that a man becomes a man," said Luck.

"No, it is by me," insisted Mind. At last they decided to make a
trial upon a villager who was working on a neighboring farm. Luck
first approached the man, and lo! the ploughshare unearthed a jug. The
farmer stopped, and opening the mouth of the jug saw that it was full
of gold coins.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "I shall be a rich man." But soon he changed his
mind and said,--"Yes, but how will it be if thieves hear about my
wealth, and come and rob me, and upon my resistance, kill me?"

While he was thus musing, he saw the judge passing by, on his way to
the village. He at once decided to give the gold to the judge, and
himself continue to live his tranquil farmer's life. Accordingly he
ran and called the judge to the farm. But before the judge had arrived,
Mind had entered the man's brain. He hid the jug and said to the judge:

"Sir, you are a judge, you are a learned man; do tell me, which of
these two oxen of mine is the better one?"

The judge was angry and departed scolding the man. Mind also departed,
and the farmer began to soliloquize:

"Oh, what a blockhead I am! why did I not give the gold to the
judge? Surely he was the best man to have it. What shall I do with
these coins? Where shall I keep them?"

He did not work during the rest of the day, but spent his time in
useless meditation. In the evening he saw the judge returning from the
village. He ran to meet him and begged him to come to his farm for a
moment. The judge thought there must be meaning in the man's conduct,
and entered the field. By that time Mind had returned to the man's
brain, and he said to the judge:

"Sir, you are a learned man; do tell me which is the larger, the lot
which I ploughed yesterday or the one I ploughed to-day?"

The judge thought that the man was crazy and departed smiling. Mind
also departed from the man, who began to beat his head, saying:

"What a pumpkin-pated fellow I am! Why did I not give the gold to
him? Where shall I keep it? What shall I do with it?"

So saying he placed the jug in his lunch-bag, and came home leading
the oxen.

"Wife! O wife!" he exclaimed; "lead the oxen to the stable, give them
hay, and take the plough in. I will go to the judge and come back."

His wife, a shrewd woman, saw that there was something in the lunch-bag
which her husband did not put down. It must be something which she
thought she ought to know, so she said to him:

"It is not my business to take care of your oxen. I have hardly time
enough to drive and milk the cows, and care for the sheep. You put
in your oxen and plough, and go wherever you please."

The man, putting the lunch-bag by the door, began to attend to
his oxen. While he was thus occupied, the woman opened the bag, and
seeing the jug full of gold, took it out and put a round stone in its
place. The man then took the bag to the judge, and placing it before
him, said:

"I have brought you this as a present." On opening it they saw that
it was a stone. The judge was angry with the man, but thinking that
he might after all have a secret, he cast him into prison. He put
two spies in his cell to watch the man and report whatever he did or
said. The man began to meditate in the jail, motioning with his hands:

"The jug was as big as this, its mouth as wide as this, its belly as
large as this, and the gold in it as much as this."

The spies reported to the judge that the man was making certain
gestures, but not speaking. The judge called the man and asked what
it was he was showing with his hands. Mind entered the man's brain,
and he answered:

"I was thinking to myself that you had a head as big as this, a neck
as thick as this, a beard as long as this. And I was asking myself
whose pate and beard was the larger, yours or our goat's?"

Thereupon the judge was very angry and ordered his men to beat the
farmer to death. The thrashing was hardly begun when the man exclaimed:

"Do not beat me, I will tell the truth."

They ceased beating him, and brought him to the judge, who asked him
to tell the truth as to what he was measuring in the jail.

"The truth is this," said the man, "that if you continued to beat me
I would surely die."

This made the judge laugh, and he ordered the man to be released,
being convinced that he was only a lunatic. The man came safely
home. Thereupon Mind and Luck shook hands and made friends, saying:

"Luck with Mind, Mind with Luck, can make a man a man."







