THE GOLDEN-HEADED FISH


I remember having heard my grandmother tell a story of a King who had
lost his eyesight. I will repeat it to you. All of the doctors and
all of the magicians of the realm held a consultation, but could not
do him any good. At last the King, hearing that there was in India a
doctor three hundred years old, wrote a letter to the King of that
country requesting him to send the aged doctor in order that the
latter might devise some remedy to restore his eyesight. The doctor
came, and after an examination of the King's eyes, said:

"There is only one remedy, and that is a tincture made from the blood
of the Golden-Headed Fish. Send men to the open sea to catch one. I
will wait one hundred days. If they cannot take one during that time
I will depart."

The King's only son, taking with him one hundred men and as many
nets, sailed to the open sea to catch the desired fish. They worked
hard and caught many kinds of fish, but none of them had a golden
head. Ninety-nine days passed by and only one day remained before
the expiration of the term. They had given up hope and decided to
sail back, when the Prince said to his men:

"Cast this one last net for my luck."

They did so, and lo! the Golden-Headed Fish was caught. They were
glad, and put the precious fish in a jug of water in order to keep
it alive. The jug was put in the Prince's cabin and they set sail
homeward. When the Prince was alone he looked at the fish, and lo! it
began to talk to him.

"Prince," said the Golden-Headed Fish, "I am a prince myself; spare
my life and cast me back into the sea. Some day you will receive
your remuneration."

The Prince took pity upon the poor fish, and cast him back into the
sea, saying:

"Go, live; if you, a fish, do not appreciate this mercy, the Creator
from above will appreciate it."

The party returned and told what the Prince had done. This enraged
the King to the very verge of madness.

"Alas!" exclaimed he, "my son desires my speedy death, that he may
himself be King. Executioners, take this unnatural son and immediately
cut off his head."

But as the Prince was the only son of the King, by the intervention
of his mother they put his clothes on a criminal and hanged him, and
banished the Prince to a distant island, where he lived a miserable
life, as nobody knew who he was. He was considered by the people as a
vile criminal and was despised by all, and, forsaken and abandoned, he
remained in this wretched condition without friends, without means of
livelihood. He felt himself so wretched that he fell into a condition
of despair, and resolved to put an end to so unbearable a life. With
this intention, he went to a high precipice on the sea-shore and
precipitated himself into the foaming deep. But as soon as he reached
the sea, lo! he found himself in the arms of a strange-looking negro,
who after setting him on the beach, fell down and saluted him, saying:

"Mighty Prince, vouchsafe to me that I may put myself at your
service. You may depend upon it that I shall please you and serve
you with all my might."

The humane and brave conduct of the stranger, and his kind and
courteous words made such an impression upon the lad that his despair
was at once banished, and he repented of his attempt to commit
suicide. He accepted the service of the negro, and they went together
to the lad's house, where a rich dinner was awaiting them. Thereafter
the Prince found everything necessary abundantly prepared, and master
and man lived together for a time. During those days the people of the
island suffered greatly from the frequent attacks of a large dragon
which devoured all the men it met. The people were in such terror that
no one ventured to go out of his house. The Prince of the island sent
his army to kill the dragon, but it could not be done. Then he sent
out heralds, proclaiming that he would give great wealth to the man
who killed the dragon. Thereupon the negro, the attendant of the lad,
went to the Prince of the island, saying:

"My master will kill the dragon, and desires to know what you intend
to give him."

"The hero who kills the dragon," said the Prince, "shall become my
son-in-law by marrying my daughter, and I will also bestow upon him
whatever presents he may desire."

"Agreed," said the negro. "Give to my master your daughter in marriage
and half of your wealth."

Then he went and, killing the dragon himself, brought its ears to
the lad, who took them to the Prince. He became the son-in-law of
the Prince by marrying his daughter, and lived in a splendid palace,
which the Prince gave him with half of his wealth. As the Prince had
no son, the lad succeeded him after his death and reigned over the
island. A son was born to him. One day the negro said to the youth:

"Abdicate your throne in favor of your son, appoint your wife as
regent, and let us go to the city of the King of the West."

The young man consented, and they started, taking with them much
riches. As soon as they reached the city of the King of the West the
negro said to the lad:

"Go ask for yourself the daughter of the King in marriage."

The lad went to the King, who was pleased with him, and said:

"Prince, I see you are a worthy man. Now let me tell you frankly
that I have given my daughter to ninety-nine Princes in marriage,
and every one died on the nuptial night. I have pity on your youth."

The lad, hearing this, was afraid, but the negro insisted, saying:

"Nay, get her in marriage. Do not be frightened."

And the youth took the maiden in marriage. As soon as the wedding
ceremony was performed, the King's servants began to prepare this
bridegroom's coffin and his grave also. During the nuptial night,
however, the negro hid himself in the wardrobe of the bedchamber. As
soon as the bride and the bridegroom were asleep he came out and
stood at the head of the bed, holding a dagger and tongs. At midnight
there came from the bride's mouth a viper to bite the bridegroom. The
negro at once took hold of the serpent with the tongs, and cutting
it in pieces with the dagger, hid it in the wardrobe. In the morning
the King's men came to bury the bridegroom, and lo! he was alive,
and they ran back to carry the good tidings to the King, and to
felicitate him on the happy event. On the following night there came
from the bride's mouth another viper, which the negro killed, and
after that they lived in peace. Now the King of the West also had
no son and after his death the lad succeeded him on the throne. One
day a messenger came to him from the city of the King of the East,
the youth's fatherland, sent from his mother, saying: "Your father
has died; come and reign in his stead."

The youth, putting a regent in his place, took his second wife,
accompanied by the negro, and started for his fatherland. He set sail
and on the way stopped at the Island, where he took also his first wife
on board. Thence they proceeded and came to the Kingdom of the East,
the lad's fatherland, where he was crowned King. Thus the Kingdoms
of the East and the West with the Island between them were united
under one crown, and were thereafter governed by the same sovereign.

Soon after the coronation of the King, the Negro asked his master to
give him leave to go to his own country.

"My friend and benefactor," said the King to the negro, "I owe you
not only everything I have, but my very life and existence. Come,
take whatever you please, and then go your way."

"Whatever we earned we earned together," replied the negro; "so I
have a right to the half of what belongs to you. However, I will take
nothing from your wealth and property, but let us divide your wives
between us."

"Well said!" answered the King, "take whomsoever you like the best."

"Not so," said the negro, "lest you should think I had the beautiful
one, and I should think that you had her. But we shall divide both
ladies into equal parts, half to you and half to me."

The King at first thought to offer opposition; but remembering the
many favors he had received from the negro, he thought it would be
ingratitude on his part not to comply with this one strange demand
of his colored friend.

"Well, I agree to that," he said at last. And they took both women
under the large sycamore tree on the seashore, where the negro hung
the daughter of the King of the West, head down, and lifted his big
sword as if to cut her in two by a single stroke. The woman shrieked
at the sight of the lifted sword.

"Oh!" exclaimed she with all her might. And lo! a serpent's nest, with
a great number of young vipers, fell from her stomach. The negro killed
the vipers, and releasing the woman gave her to her husband, saying:

"Now, go enjoy your wives and rule over your empire in peace; there
is no more evil left to trouble you. In doing all these things, I
have done my duty, because you saved my life. I am the Golden-Headed
Fish. Farewell!" This he said, and dived into the sea, where he
still lives.







HUSBAND OR WIFE!--WHICH?


A goldsmith and his wife lived a happy life in perfect harmony and
love. In all the country they were considered the best patterns
of conjugal love. It was their custom not to put out the light in
their house but let it burn all the night. One night as the King
and Queen were looking from their high window at the sleeping city,
they noticed the goldsmith's light gleaming at a distance, and his
well-known matrimonial love became the subject of debate between the
royal couple. The King insisted that it was on account of the husband's
virtue that he and his wife were in such perfect harmony. The Queen
insisted that it was on account of the wife's virtue. Thereupon they
decided to make a trial and find out the truth. On the following day
the Queen sent one of her handmaids to the goldsmith, saying that she
had fallen in love with him and would become his wife if he killed
his present wife.

"Not I," answered the goldsmith; "I will not part from my wife for
all the world. I am content with what Heaven has assigned me. I will
not exchange my wife for a thousand Queens."

On the following day the King sent a servant to the goldsmith's wife,
saying that he had been charmed with her beauty and wanted to make
her queen, if she would kill her present husband.

"Is it really true? Is it really true?" exclaimed the woman.

"It is true," answered the servant.

"Well, then," said the woman, "I will kill my husband this very
night. When you see our light has gone out to-night, know that I have
begun to murder him."

The servant brought word to the King, who ordered his men to be
ready and go to the rescue of the goldsmith if the light was really
put out. In the evening the goldsmith came home. After supper the
husband and wife had a nice talk as usual, and the husband, putting
his head in the lap of his wife, fell asleep. The woman put the loop
of a rope around his neck, blew out the candle, and began to pull the
rope. The poor goldsmith was strangled before the King's men came
to the rescue. This murder of one of his best subjects grieved the
King so deeply that he thereafter hated all women from the depths of
his soul. He could not sleep that night, and early in the morning he
called his prime minister, saying:

"To-day I will go hunting. You must put to death all the women of
the country, old and young, before I come home this evening."

The prime minister had an aged father, to whom he went and repeated
the King's terrible order.

"Do not obey it," said the old man; "I shall be responsible. Go and
hide yourself for a couple of days from the anger of the King."

In the evening the King came back from hunting, and seeing the women
of the realm still alive, was enraged, and called his prime minister
into his presence. The old man appeared before the King, standing on
his crutches.

"Where is your son?" said the King. "I want to cut off his head first,
then those of the women."

"Long live the King!" said the old man with his trembling
voice. "Permit me to tell you an experience of mine, and then put
your command into execution if you choose."

"Speak!" said the King, who at the same time gave orders to the
soldiers to be ready to butcher the women.

"I was prime minister during your father's reign," said the old
man. "One day we had gone to hunt. I was led astray by the game,
and came near a village on the other side of the forest. Soon I was
overtaken by an unknown horseman, who took hold of me, and lifting
me from the back of my horse, placed me before him upon the saddle
of his own horse, bound me with a rope, and tied the reins of my
horse to the back of his own. To struggle on my part was useless,
because he was very strong. Soon we arrived at a cemetery, where we
dismounted. For a while he looked here and there, and stopping at a
certain place, began to dig, and ordered me to shovel the earth after
him. Thus working we dug two graves. We mounted again and dismounted at
the foot of a castle wall. He bound me carefully to the saddle of his
horse, and himself climbed up the wall. After a few minutes he threw
down from the top of the wall the headless corpse of a man who had
just been murdered. He came down, and placing the corpse on my horse
took it and myself to the graves we had dug. I was horror stricken,
and thought that one of the graves must be for the corpse and the
other for me. But to my surprise, he untied me and bade me assist
him to bury the corpse, which I did. He then turned to me and said:

"'I know who you are; you are the prime minister of this state. Now
listen to me, and go and tell the King my story. I am a woman and
had a boundless love for my husband. This vile Prince, whose body we
have just now buried, having fallen in love with me, killed my own
husband that he might win my love. But I vowed by the sacred love I
bore my husband to kill the murderer and bury him under my husband's
feet. Now that is accomplished. I vowed next to kill myself, that I
might be buried by the side of my husband. For the love of Heaven,
bury me in this grave and tell my story to the King.' This she said,
and stabbing herself with a dagger, fell dead at my feet. I buried
her in that grave near her husband. Here you have the example of a
faithful and brave wife. If the unfaithful wife of the goldsmith gave
you occasion to order the death of all the women of the realm, let
this woman be the means of saving her sex from general slaughter. Why
shall many good women die because of the wickedness of one woman?"

Thereupon the King revoked the order and only the goldsmith's wife
was put to death.







