Wen Ch'ang and the Great Bear








Thus we have the God of Literature, Wen Ch'ang Ti Chuen, duly installed
in the Chinese pantheon, and sacrifices were offered to him in the
schools.

But scholars, especially those about to enter for the public
competitive examinations, worshipped as the God of Literature, or as
his palace or abode (Wen Ch'ang), the star K'uei in the Great Bear,
or Dipper, or Bushel--the latter name derived from its resemblance in
shape to the measure used by the Chinese and called _tou_. The term
K'uei was more generally applied to the four stars forming the body
or square part of the Dipper, the three forming the tail or handle
being called Shao or Piao. How all this came about is another story.

A scholar, as famous for his literary skill as his facial deformities,
had been admitted as first academician at the metropolitan
examinations. It was the custom that the Emperor should give with
his own hand a rose of gold to the fortunate candidate. This scholar,
whose name was Chung K'uei, presented himself according to custom to
receive the reward which by right was due to him. At the sight of
his repulsive face the Emperor refused the golden rose. In despair
the miserable rejected one went and threw himself into the sea. At
the moment when he was being choked by the waters a mysterious fish
or monster called _ao_ raised him on its back and brought him to the
surface. K'uei ascended to Heaven and became arbiter of the destinies
of men of letters. His abode was said to be the star K'uei, a name
given by the Chinese to the sixteen stars of the constellation or
'mansion' of Andromeda and Pisces. The scholars quite soon began
to worship K'uei as the God of Literature, and to represent it on a
column in the temples. Then sacrifices were offered to it. This star
or constellation was regarded as the palace of the god. The legend
gave rise to an expression frequently used in Chinese of one who
comes out first in an examination, namely, _tu chan ao t'ou_, "to
stand alone on the sea-monster's head." It is especially to be noted
that though the two K'ueis have the same sound they are represented
by different characters, and that the two constellations are not the
same, but are situated in widely different parts of the heavens.

How then did it come about that scholars worshipped the K'uei in
the Great Bear as the abode of the God of Literature? (It may be
remarked in passing that a literary people could not have chosen
a more appropriate palace for this god, since the Great Bear,
the 'Chariot of Heaven,' is regarded as the centre and governor
of the whole universe.) The worship, we saw, was at first that of
the star K'uei, the apotheosized 'homely,' successful, but rejected
candidate. As time went on, there was a general demand for a sensible,
concrete representation of this star-god: a simple character did not
satisfy the popular taste. But it was no easy matter to comply with the
demand. Eventually, guided doubtless by the community of pronunciation,
they substituted for the star or group of stars K'uei (1),
venerated in ancient times, a new star or group of stars K'uei (2),
forming the square part of the Bushel, Dipper, or Great Bear. But for
this again no bodily image could be found, so the form of the written
character itself was taken, and so drawn as to represent a _kuei_
(3) (disembodied spirit, or ghost) with its foot raised, and bearing
aloft a _tou_ (4) (bushel-measure). The adoration was thus misplaced,
for the constellation K'uei (2) was mistaken for K'uei (1), the proper
object of worship. It was due to this confusion by the scholars that
the Northern Bushel came to be worshipped as the God of Literature.









