The Origin of a Lake








In the city of Ta-yeh Hsien, Hupei, there is a large sheet of water
known as the Liang-ti Lake. The people of the district give the
following account of its origin:

About five hundred years ago, during the Ming dynasty, there was no
lake where the broad waters now spread. A flourishing _hsien_ city
stood in the centre of a populous country. The city was noted for its
wickedness, but amid the wicked population dwelt one righteous woman,
a strict vegetarian and a follower of all good works. In a vision of
the night it was revealed to her that the city and neighbourhood would
be destroyed by water, and the sign promised was that when the stone
lions in front of the _yamen_ wept tears of blood, then destruction
was near at hand. Like Jonah at Nineveh, the woman, known to-day
simply as Niang-tzu, walked up and down the streets of the city,
warning all of the coming calamity. She was laughed at and looked
upon as mad by the careless people. A pork-butcher in the town,
a noted wag, took some pig's blood and sprinkled it round the eyes
of the stone lions. This had the desired effect, for when Niang-tzu
saw the blood she fled from the city amid the jeers and laughter of
the inhabitants. Before many hours had passed, however, the face of
the sky darkened, a mighty earthquake shook the country-side, there
was a great subsidence of the earth's surface, and the waters of the
Yangtzu River flowed into the hollow, burying the city and villages
out of sight. But a spot of ground on which the good woman stood,
after escaping from the doomed city, remained at its normal level,
and it stands to-day in the midst of the lake, an island called
Niang-tzu, a place at which boats anchor at night, or to which they
fly for shelter from the storms that sweep the lake. They are saved
to-day because of one good woman helped by the gods so long ago.

As a proof of the truth of the above story, it is asserted that on
clear days traces of the buried city may be seen, while occasionally
a fisherman casting his net hauls up some household utensil or relic
of bygone days.









