The Spiritual Alligator








In this country was a dragon, or spiritual alligator, which transformed
itself into a young man named Shen Lang, and married Chia Yue, daughter
of the Chief Judge of T'an Chou (Ch'ang-sha Fu, capital of Hunan). The
young people lived in rooms below the official apartments. During
spring and summer Shen Lang, as dragons are wont to do, roamed in the
rivers and lakes. One day Hsue Chen-chuen met him, recognized him as a
dragon, and knew that he was the cause of the numerous floods which
were devastating Kiangsi Province. He determined to find a means of
getting rid of him.

Shen Lang, aware of the steps being taken against him, changed himself
into a yellow ox and fled. Hsue Chen-chuen at once transformed himself
into a black ox and started in pursuit. The yellow ox jumped down a
well to hide, but the black ox followed suit. The yellow ox then jumped
out again, and escaped to Ch'ang-sha, where he reassumed a human form
and lived with Ms wife in the home of his father-in-law, Hsue Sun,
returning to the town, hastened to the _yamen,_ and called to Shen
Lang to come out and show himself, addressing him in a severe tone
of voice as follows: "Dragon, how dare you hide yourself there under
a borrowed form?" Shen Lang then reassumed the form of a spiritual
alligator, and Hsue Sun ordered the spiritual soldiers to kill him. He
then commanded his two sons to come out of their abode. By merely
spurting a mouthful of water on them he transformed them into young
dragons. Chia Yue was told to vacate the rooms with all speed, and
in the twinkling of an eye the whole _yamen_ sank beneath the earth,
and there remained nothing but a lake where it had been.

Hsue Chen-chuen, after his victory over the dragon, assembled the members
of his family, to the number of forty-two, on Hsi Shan, outside the
city of Nan-ch'ang Fu, and all ascended to Heaven in full daylight,
taking with them even the dogs and chickens. He was then 133 years
old. This took place on the first day of the eighth moon of the second
year (A.D. 374) of the reign-period Ning-K'ang of the reign of the
Emperor Hsiao Wu Ti of the Eastern Chin dynasty.

Subsequently a temple was erected to him, and in A.D. 1111 he was
canonized as Just Prince, Admirable and Beneficent.









