Thousand-li Eye and Favourable-wind Ear








Ch'ien-li Yen, 'Thousand-_li_ Eye,' and Shun-feng Erh, 'Favourable-wind
Ear,' were two brothers named Kao Ming and Kao Chio. On account
of their martial bearing they found favour with the tyrant emperor
Chou Wang, who appointed them generals, and sent them to serve with
Generalissimo Yuean Hung (who was a monkey which had taken human form)
at Meng-ching.

Kao Ming was very tall, with a blue face, flaming eyes, a large mouth,
and prominent teeth like those of a rhinoceros.

Kao Chio had a greenish face and skin, two horns on his head, a red
beard, and a large mouth with teeth shaped like swords.

One of their first encounters was with No-cha, who hurled at them his
mystic bracelet, which struck Kao Chio on the head, but did not leave
even a scratch. When, however, he seized his fire-globe the brothers
thought it wiser to retreat.

Finding no means of conquering them, Yang Chien, Chiang Tzu-ya, and
Li Ching took counsel together and decided to have recourse to Fu
Hsi's trigrams, and by smearing them with the blood of a fowl and a
dog to destroy their spiritual power.

But the two brothers were fully informed of what was
designed. Thousand-_li_ Eye had seen and Favourable-wind Ear had
heard everything, so that all their preparations proved unavailing.

Yang Chien then went to Chiang Tzu-ya and said to him: "These
two brothers are powerful devils; I must take more effectual
measures." "Where will you go for aid?" asked Chiang Tzu-ya. "I
cannot tell you, for they would hear," replied Yang. He then
left. Favourable-wind Ear heard this dialogue, and Thousand-_li_
Eye saw him leave. "He did not say where he was going," they said
to each other, "but we fear him not." Yang Chien went to Yue-ch'uean
Shan, where lived Yue-ting Chen-jen, 'Hero Jade-tripod.' He told him
about their two adversaries, and asked him how they were to conquer
them. "These two genii," replied the Chen-jen, "are from Ch'i-p'an
Shan, Chessboard Mountain. One is a spiritual peach-tree, the other
a spiritual pomegranate-tree. Their roots cover an area of thirty
square _li_ of ground. On that mountain there is a temple dedicated to
Huang-ti, in which are clay images of two devils called Ch'ien-li Yen
and Shun-feng Erh. The peach-tree and pomegranate-tree, having become
spiritual beings, have taken up their abode in these images. One has
eyes which can see objects distinctly at a distance of a thousand _li_,
the other ears that can hear sounds at a like distance. But beyond
that distance they can neither see nor hear. Return and tell Chiang
Tzu-ya to have the roots of those trees torn up and burned, and the
images destroyed; then the two genii will be easily vanquished. In
order that they may neither see nor hear you during your conversation
with Chiang Tzu-ya, wave flags about the camp and order the soldiers
to beat tom-toms and drums."









