The Otherworld Similar to this World








The similarity of the Otherworld to this world above alluded to is
well shown by Du Bose in his _Dragon, Image, and, Demon_, from which
I quote the following passages:

"The world of spirits is an exact counterpart of the Chinese Empire,
or, as has been remarked, it is 'China ploughed under'; this is the
world of light; put out the lights and you have Tartarus. China has
eighteen  provinces, so has Hades; each province has
eight or nine prefects, or departments; so each province in Hades
has eight or nine departments; every prefect or department averages
ten counties, so every department in Hades has ten counties. In
Soochow the Governor, the provincial Treasurer, the Criminal Judge,
the Intendant of Circuit, the Prefect or Departmental Governor, and
the three District Magistrates or County Governors each have temples
with their apotheoses in the other world. Not only these, but every
_yamen_ secretary, runner, executioner, policeman, and constable
has his counterpart in the land of darkness. The market-towns have
also mandarins of lesser rank in charge, besides a host of revenue
collectors, the bureau of government works and other departments,
with several hundred thousand officials, who all rank as gods beyond
the grave. These deities are civilians; the military having a similar
gradation for the armies of Hades, whose captains are gods, and whose
battalions are devils.

"The framers of this wonderful scheme for the spirits of the dead,
having no higher standard, transferred to the authorities of
that world the etiquette, tastes, and venality of their correlate
officials in the Chinese Government, thus making it necessary to
use similar means to appease the one which are found necessary to
move the other. All the State gods have their assistants, attendants,
door-keepers, runners, horses, horsemen, detectives, and executioners,
corresponding in every particular to those of Chinese officials of
the same rank." (Pp. 358-359.)

This likeness explains also why the hierarchy of beings in the
Otherworld concerns itself not only with the affairs of the Otherworld,
but with those of this world as well. So faithful is the likeness
that we find the gods (the term is used in this chapter to include
goddesses, who are, however, relatively few) subjected to many of
the rules and conditions existing on this earth. Not only do they, as
already shown, differ in rank, but they hold _levees_ and audiences
and may be promoted for distinguished services, just as the Chinese
officials are. They "may rise from an humble position to one near the
Pearly Emperor, who gives them the reward of merit for ruling well the
affairs of men. The correlative deities of the mandarins are only of
equal rank, yet the fact that they have been apotheosized makes them
their superiors and fit objects of worship. Chinese mandarins rotate in
office, generally every three years, and then there is a corresponding
change in Hades. The image in the temple remains the same, but the
spirit which dwells in the clay tabernacle changes, so the idol has
a different name, birthday, and tenant. The priests are informed by
the Great Wizard of the Dragon Tiger Mountain, but how can the people
know gods which are not the same to-day as yesterday?" (Pp. 360-361.)

The gods also indulge in amusements, marry, sin, are punished, die,
are resurrected, or die and are transformed, or die finally. 









