The Lotus Cave








When the party left the Elephant Country, seeing a mountain ahead,
the Master warned his disciples to be careful. Sun said: "Master, say
not so; remember the text of the Sacred Book, 'So long as the heart is
right there is nothing to fear.'" After this Sun kept a close watch
on Pa-chieh, who, while professing to be on guard, slept most of the
time. When they arrived at Ping-ting Shan they were approached by a
woodcutter, who warned them that in the mountain, which extended for
600 _li_ (200 miles), there was a Lotus Cave, inhabited by a band
of demons under two chiefs, who were lying in wait to devour the
travellers. The woodcutter then disappeared. Accordingly, Pa-chieh
was ordered to keep watch. But, seeing some hay, he lay down and went
to sleep, and the mountain demons carried him away to the Lotus Cave.

On seeing Pa-chieh, the second chief said: "He is no good; you must
go in search of the Master and the Monkey." All this time the Monkey,
to protect his Master, was walking ahead of the horse, swinging his
club up and down and to right and left. The Demon-king saw him from
the top of the mountain and said to himself: "This Monkey is famous
for his magic, but I will prove that he is no match for me; I will
yet feast on his Master." So, descending the mountain, he transformed
himself into a lame beggar and waited by the roadside. The Master,
out of pity, persuaded the Monkey to carry him. While on the Monkey's
back the Demon, by magic skill, threw Mount Meru on to Sun's head,
but the Monkey warded it off with his left shoulder, and walked
on. Then the Demon threw Mount O-mei on to Sun's head, and this
he warded off with his right shoulder, and walked on, much to the
Demon's surprise. Lastly the Demon caused T'ai Shan to fall on to his
head. This at last stunned the Monkey. Sha Ho-shang now defended the
Master with his staff, which was, however, no match for the Demon's
starry sword. The Demon seized the Master and carried him under one
arm and Sha Ho-shang under the other to the Lotus Cave.

The two Demons then planned to take their two most precious things,
a yellow gourd and a jade vase, and try to bottle the Monkey. They
arranged to carry them upside down and call out the Monkey's name. If
he replied, then he would be inside, and they could seal him up,
using the seal of the great Ancient of Days, the dweller in the
mansion of T'ai Sui. 









