Li T'ieh-kuai








Li T'ieh-kuai, depicted always with his crutch and gourd full of
magic medicines, was of the family name of Li, his own name being
Li Yuean (Hs'uean, now read Yuean). He is also known as K'ung-mu. Hsi
Wang Mu cured him of an ulcer on the leg and taught him the art of
becoming immortal. He was canonized as Rector of the East. He is
said to have been of commanding stature and dignified mien, devoting
himself solely to the study of Taoist lore. Hsi Wang Mu made him a
present of an iron crutch, and sent him to the capital to teach the
doctrine of immortality to Han Chung-li.

He is also identified with Li Ning-yang, to whom Lao Tzu descended
from Heaven in order to instruct him in the wisdom of the gods. Soon
after he had completed his course of instruction his soul left his
body to go on a visit to Hua Shan. Some say he was summoned by Lao
Tzu, others that Lao Tzu engaged him as escort to the countries of
Hsi Yue. He left his disciple Lang Ling in charge of his body, saying
that if he did not return within seven days he was to have the body
cremated. Unfortunately, when only six days had elapsed the disciple
was called away to the death-bed of his mother. In order to be able
to leave at once he cremated the body forthwith, and when the soul
returned it found only a heap of ashes. Some say the body was not
cremated, but only became devitalized through neglect or through
being uninhabited for so long a time. The object of the setting of
the watch was not only to prevent injury to or theft of the body,
but also to prevent any other soul from taking up its abode in it.

In a forest near by a beggar had just died of hunger. Finding this
corpse untenanted, the wandering spirit entered it through the
temples, and made off. When he found that his head was long and
pointed, his face black, his beard and hair woolly and dishevelled,
his eyes of gigantic size, and one of his legs lame, he wished to
get out of this vile body; but Lao Tzu advised him not to make the
attempt and gave him a gold band to keep his hair in order, and an
iron crutch to help his lame leg. On lifting his hand to his eyes,
he found they were as large as buckles. That is why he was called Li
K'ung-mu, 'Li Hollow Eyes.' Popularly he is known as Li T'ieh-kuai,
'Li with the Iron Crutch.' No precise period seems to be assigned
to his career on earth, though one tradition places him in the Yuean
dynasty. Another account says that he was changed into a dragon,
and in that form ascended to Heaven.

Elsewhere it is related that T'ieh-kuai, after entering the body of
the lame beggar, benevolently proceeded to revive the mother of Yang,
his negligent disciple. Leaning on his iron staff and carrying a gourd
of medicines on his back he went to Yang's house, where preparations
were being made for the funeral. The contents of the gourd, poured
into the mouth, revived the dead woman. He then made himself known,
and, giving Yang another pill, vanished in a gust of wind. Two hundred
years later he effected the immortalization of his disciple.

During his peregrinations on earth he would hang a bottle on the
wall at night and jump into it, emerging on the following morning. He
frequently returned to earth, and at times tried to bring about the
transmigration of others.

An example is the case of Ch'ao Tu, the watchman. T'ieh-kuai walked
into a fiery furnace and bade Ch'ao follow. The latter, being afraid
of imitating an act evidently associated with the supernatural world
of evil spirits, refused to do so. T'ieh-kuai then told Ch'ao to step
on to a leaf floating on the surface of the river, saying that it was
a boat that would bear him across safely. Again the watchman refused,
whereupon T'ieh-kuai, remarking that the cares of this world were
evidently too weighty for him to be able to ascend to immortality,
stepped on to the leaf himself and vanished.









