A Victim of Ta Chi








Concerning Tzu-wei Hsing, the constellation Tzu-wei (north circumpolar
stars), of which the stellar deity is Po I-k'ao, the following legend
is related in the _Feng shen yen i_.

Po I-k'ao was the eldest son of Wen Wang, and governed the kingdom
during the seven years that the old King Was detained as a prisoner of
the tyrant Chou. He did everything possible to procure his father's
release. Knowing the tastes of the cruel King, he sent him for his
harem ten of the prettiest women who could be found, accompanied by
seven chariots made of perfumed wood, and a white-faced monkey of
marvellous intelligence. Besides these he included in his presents
a magic carpet, on which it was necessary only to sit in order to
recover immediately from the effects of drunkenness.

Unfortunately for Po I-k'ao, Chou's favourite concubine, Ta
Chi, conceived a passion for him and had recourse to all sorts
of ruses to catch him in her net; but his conduct was throughout
irreproachable. Vexed by his indifference, she tried slander in order
to bring about his ruin. But her calumnies did not at first have
the result she expected. Chou, after inquiry, was convinced of the
innocence of Po. But an accident spoiled everything. In the middle
of an amusing _seance_ the monkey which had been given to the King
by Po perceived some sweets in the hand of Ta Chi, and, jumping on
to her body, snatched them from Her. The King and his concubine were
furious, Chou had the monkey killed forthwith, and Ta Chi accused Po
I-k'ao of having brought the animal into the palace with the object
of making an attempt on the lives of the King and herself. But the
Prince explained that the monkey, being only an animal, could not
grasp even the first idea of entering into a conspiracy.

Shortly after this Po committed an unpardonable fault which changed
the goodwill of the King into mortal enmity. He allowed himself to
go so far as to suggest to the King that he should break off his
relations with this infamous woman, the source of all the woes which
were desolating the kingdom, and when Ta Chi on this account grossly
insulted him he struck her with his lute.

For this offence Ta Chi caused him to be crucified in the palace. Large
nails were driven through his hands and feet, and his flesh was cut
off in pieces. Not content with ruining Po I-k'ao, this wretched
woman wished also to ruin Wen Wang. She therefore advised the King to
have the flesh of the murdered man made up into rissoles and sent as
a present to his father. If he refused to eat the flesh of his own
son he was to be accused of contempt for the King, and there would
thus be a pretext for having him executed. Wen Wang, being versed in
divination and the science of the _pa kua_, Eight Trigrams, knew that
these rissoles contained the flesh of his son, and to avoid the snare
spread for him he ate three of the rissoles in the presence of the
royal envoys. On their return the latter reported this to the King,
who found himself helpless on learning of Wen Wang's conduct.

Po I-k'ao was canonized by Chiang Tzu-ya, and appointed ruler of the
constellation Tzu-wei of the North Polar heavens.









