Immortals, Heroes, Saints








An Immortal, according to Taoist lore, is a solitary man of the
mountains. He appears to die, but does not. After 'death' his body
retains all the qualities of the living. The body or corpse is for
him only a means of transition, a phase of metamorphosis--a cocoon
or chrysalis, the temporary abode of the butterfly.

To reach this state a hygienic regimen both of the body and mind must
be observed. All luxury, greed, and ambition must be avoided. But
negation is not enough. In the system of nourishment all the elements
which strengthen the essence of the constituent _yin_ and _yang_
principles must be found by means of medicine, chemistry, gymnastic
exercises, etc. When the maximum vital force has been acquired the
means of preserving it and keeping it from the attacks of death
and disease must be discovered; in a word, he must spiritualize
himself--render himself completely independent of matter. All
the experiments have for their object the storing in the pills of
immortality the elements necessary for the development of the vital
force and for the constitution of a new spiritual and super-humanized
being. In this ascending perfection there are several grades:

(1) The Immortal (_Hsien_). The first stage consists in bringing
about the birth of the superhuman in the ascetic's person, which
reaching perfection leaves the earthly body, like the grasshopper
its sheath. This first stage attained, the Immortal travels at will
throughout the universe, enjoys all the advantages of perfect health
without dreading disease or death, eats and drinks copiously--nothing
is wanting to complete his happiness.

(2) The Perfect Man, or Hero (_Chen-jen_). The second stage is a higher
one. The whole body is spiritualized. It has become so subtile, so
spiritual, that it can fly in the air. Borne on the wings of the wind,
seated on the clouds of Heaven, it travels from one world to another
and fixes its habitation in the stars. It is freed from all laws of
matter, but is, however, not completely changed into pure spirit.

(3) The Saint (_Sheng-jen_). The third stage is that of the superhuman
beings or saints. They are those who have attained to extraordinary
intelligence and virtue.









