The Hsi Yu Chi








In dealing with the gods of China we noticed the monkey among them. Why
and in what manner he attained to that exalted rank is set forth in
detail in the _Hsi yu chi_ --a work the contents of which have
become woven into the fabric of Chinese legendary lore and are known
and loved by every intelligent native. Its pages are filled with
ghosts, demons, and fairies, good and bad, but "it contains no more
than the average Chinese really believes to exist, and his belief in
such manifestations is so firm that from the cradle to the grave he
lives and moves and has his being in reference to them." Its characters
are said to be allegorical, though it may be doubted whether these
implications may rightly be read into the Chinese text. Thus:

Hsuean (or Yuean) Chuang, or T'ang Seng, is the pilgrim of the _Hsi yu
chi_, who symbolizes conscience, to which all actions are brought for
trial. The priestly garment of Hsuean Chuang symbolizes the good work
of the rectified human nature. It is held to be a great protection
to the new heart from the myriads of evil beings which surround it,
seeking its destruction.

Sun Hou-tzu, the Monkey Fairy, represents human nature, which is prone
to all evil. His unreasonable vagaries moved Hsuean Chuang to compel
him to wear a Head-splitting Helmet which would contract upon his head
in moments of waywardness. The agonizing pressure thus caused would
bring him to his senses, irrespective of his distance from his master.

The iron wand of Sun Hou-tzu is said to represent the use that can be
made of doctrine. It was useful for all purposes, great or small. By
a word it could be made invisible, and by a word it could become long
enough to span the distance between Heaven and earth.

Chu Pa-chieh, the Pig Fairy, with his muck-rake, stands for the
coarser passions, which are constantly at war with the conscience in
their endeavours to cast off all restraint.

Sha Ho-shang, Priest Sha, is a good representation of Mr Faithful
in _The Pilgrim's Progress_. In the _Hsi yu chi_ he stands for the
human character, which is naturally weak and which needs constant
encouragement.









