The God of the Wind








Feng Po, the God of the Wind, is represented as an old man with a
white beard, yellow cloak, and blue and red cap. He holds a large
sack, and directs the wind which comes from its mouth in any direction
he pleases.

There are various ideas regarding the nature of this deity. He is
regarded as a stellar divinity under the control of the star Ch'i,
 because the wind blows at the time when the moon leaves that
celestial mansion. He is also said to be a dragon called Fei Lien, at
first one of the supporters of the rebel Ch'ih Yu, who was defeated
by Huang Ti. Having been transformed into a spiritual monster, he
stirred up tremendous winds in the southern regions. The Emperor
Yao sent Shen I with three hundred soldiers to quiet the storms and
appease Ch'ih Yu's relatives, who were wreaking their vengeance on the
people. Shen I ordered the people to spread a long cloth in front of
their houses, fixing it with stones. The wind, blowing against this,
had to change its direction. Shen I then flew on the wind to the top
of a high mountain, whence he saw a monster at the base. It had the
shape of a huge yellow and white sack, and kept inhaling and exhaling
in great gusts. Shen I, concluding that this was the cause of all
these storms, shot an arrow and hit the monster, whereupon it took
refuge in a deep cave. Here it turned on Shen I and, drawing a sword,
dared him to attack the Mother of the Winds. Shen I, however, bravely
faced the monster and discharged another arrow, this time hitting it
in the knee. The monster immediately threw down its sword and begged
that its life might be spared.

Fei Lien is elsewhere described as a dragon who was originally one of
the wicked ministers of the tyrant Chou, and could walk with unheard-of
swiftness. Both he and his son O Lai, who was so strong that he could
tear a tiger or rhinoceros to pieces with his hands, were killed when
in the service of Chou Wang. Fei Lien is also said to have the body
of a stag, about the size of a leopard, with a bird's head, horns,
and a serpent's tail, and to be able to make the wind blow whenever
he wishes.









