The Fire-quenching Fan








In the autumn the pilgrims found themselves in the Ssu Ha Li Country,
where everything was red--red walls, red tiles, red varnish on doors
and furniture. Sixty _li_ from this place was the Flaming Mountain,
which lay on their road westward.

An old man they met told them that it was possible to cross the
Flaming Mountain only if they had the Magic Iron Fan, which, waved
once, quenched fire, waved a second time produced strong wind, and
waved a third time produced rain. This magic fan was kept by the
Iron-fan Princess in a cave on Ts'ui-yuen Shan, 1500 _li_ distant. On
hearing this, Sun mounted a cloud, and in an instant was transported
to the cave. The Iron-fan Princess was one of the _lochas_ (wives
and daughters of demons), and the mother of the Red Child Demon, who
had become a disciple of Kuan Yin. On seeing Sun she was very angry,
and determined to be revenged for the outwitting of her husband,
King Ox-head, and for the carrying away of her son. The Monkey said:
"If you lend me the Iron Fan I will bring your son to see you." For
answer she struck him with a sword. They then fell to fighting, the
contest lasting a long while, until at length, feeling her strength
failing, the Princess took out the Iron Fan and waved it. The wind
it raised blew Sun to a distance of 84,000 _li_, and whirled him
about like a leaf in a whirlwind. But he soon returned, reinforced
by further magic power lent him by the Buddhist saints. The Princess,
however, deceived him by giving him a fan which increased the flames
of the mountain instead of quenching them. Sun and his friends had
to retreat more than 20 _li_, or they would have been burned.

The local mountain-gods now appeared, bringing refreshments, and urging
the pilgrims to get the Fan so as to enable them to proceed on their
journey. Sun pointed to his fan and said: "Is not this the Fan?" They
smiled and said: "No, this is a false one which the Princess has
given you." They added: "Originally there was no Flaming Mountain, but
when you upset the furnace in Heaven five hundred years ago the fire
fell here, and has been burning ever since. For not having taken more
care in Heaven, we have been set to guard it. The Demon-king Ox-head,
though he married the _locha_ Princess, deserted her some two years
ago for the only daughter of a fox-king. They live at Chi-lei Shan,
some three thousand _li_ from here. If you can get the true Iron
Fan through his help you will be able to extinguish the flames, take
your Master to the West, save the lives of many people round here,
and enable us to return to Heaven once more."

Sun at once mounted a cloud and was soon at Chi-lei Shan. There
he met the Fox-princess, whom he upbraided and pursued back to
her cave. The Ox-demon came out and became very angry with Sun
for having frightened her. Sun asked him to return with him to the
_locha_ Princess and persuade her to give him the Magic Fan, This he
refused to do. They then fought three battles, in all of which Sun
was successful. He changed into the Ox-demon's shape and visited the
_locha_ Princess. She, thinking he was the Ox-demon, gladly received
him, and finally gave him the Magic Fan; he then set out to return
to his Master.









