The Kitchen-god








Tsao Chuen is a Taoist invention, but is universally worshipped by
all families in China--about sixty millions of pictures of him are
regularly worshipped twice a month--at new and full moon. "His temple
is a little niche in the brick cooking-range; his palace is often
filled with smoke; and his Majesty sells for one farthing." He is also
called 'the God of the Stove.' The origin of his worship, according to
the legend, is that a Taoist priest, Li Shao-chuen by name, of the Ch'i
State, obtained from the Kitchen-god the double favour of exemption
from growing old and of being able to live without eating. He then
went to the Emperor Hsiao Wu-ti (140-86 B.C.) of the Han dynasty, and
promised that credulous monarch that he should benefit by the powers
of the god provided that he would consent to patronize and encourage
his religion. It was by this means, he added, that the Emperor Huang
Ti obtained his knowledge of alchemy, which enabled him to make gold.

The Emperor asked the priest to bring him his divine patron, and one
night the image of Tsao Chuen appeared to him.

Deceived by this trick, dazzled by the ingots of gold which he too
should obtain, and determined to risk everything for the pill of
immortality which was among the benefits promised, the Emperor made
a solemn sacrifice to the God of the Kitchen.

This was the first time that a sacrifice had been officially offered
to this new deity.

Li Shao-chuen gradually lost the confidence of the Emperor and, at
his wits' end, conceived the plan of writing some phrases on a piece
of silk and then causing them to be swallowed by an ox. This done,
he announced that a wonderful script would be found in the animal's
stomach. The ox being killed, the script was found there as predicted,
but Li's unlucky star decreed that the Emperor should recognize
his handwriting, and he was forthwith put to death. Nevertheless,
the worship of the Kitchen-god continued and increased, and exists
in full vigour down to the present day.

This deity has power over the lives of the members of each family
under his supervision, distributes riches and poverty at will, and
makes an annual report to the Supreme Being on the conduct of the
family during the year, for which purpose he is usually absent for from
four to seven days. Some hold that he also makes these reports once or
twice or several times each month. Various ceremonies are performed on
seeing him off to Heaven and welcoming him back. One of the former,
as we saw, is to regale him with honey, so that only sweet words,
if any, may be spoken by him while up aloft!









