Strange Medicine








One serious difficulty, however, presented itself, and that was that
the right medicine was almost impossible to procure. The King showed
his displeasure by saying: "For every illness there is a medical
prescription, and for every prescription a specific medicine; how
can you say that the diagnosis is easy, but that there is no remedy?"

"Your Majesty," replied the priest, "the remedy for your illness is
not to be found in any pharmacy, and no one would agree to sell it."

The King became angry, believed that he was being imposed upon,
and ordered those about him to drive away the priest, who left smiling.

The following night the King saw in a dream an old man who said to
him: "This priest alone can cure your illness, and if you ask him he
himself will give you the right remedy."

The King awoke as soon as these words had been uttered, and begged
the Queen to recall the priest. When the latter had returned, the
King related his dream, and begged the priest to procure for him the
remedy required. "What, after all, is this remedy that I must have
in order to be cured?" he asked.

"There must be the hand and eye of a living person, from which to
compound the ointment which alone can save you," answered the priest.

The King called out in indignation: "This priest is fooling me! Who
would ever give his hand or his eye? Even if anyone would, I could
never have the heart to make use of them."

"Nevertheless," said the priest, "there is no other effective remedy."      

"Then where can I procure this remedy?" asked the King.     

"Your Majesty must send your ministers, who must observe the Buddhist
rules of abstinence, to Hsiang Shan, where they will be given what
is required."

"Where is Hsiang Shan, and how far from here?"      

"About three thousand or more _li_, but I myself will indicate the
route to be followed; in a very short time they will return."

The King, who was suffering terribly, was more contented when he
heard that the journey could be rapidly accomplished. He called his
two ministers, Chao Chen and Liu Ch'in, and instructed them to lose
no time in starting for Hsiang Shan and to observe scrupulously the
Buddhist rules of abstinence. He ordered the Minister of Ceremonies
to detain the priest in the palace until their return.









