Confucius not a God








It should be noted that Confucius himself is not a god, though he
has been and is worshipped (66,000 animals used to be offered to him
every year; probably the number is about the same now). Suggestions
have been made to make him the God of China and Confucianism the
religion of China, so that he and his religion would hold the same
relative positions that Christ and Christianity do in the West. I
was present at the lengthy debate which took place on this subject
in the Chinese Parliament in February 1917, but in spite of many
long, learned, and eloquent speeches, chiefly by scholars of the
old school, the motion was not carried. Nevertheless, the worship
accorded to Confucius was and is (except by 'new' or 'young' China)
of so extreme a nature that he may almost be described as the great
unapotheosized god of China.  Some of his portraits even ascribe to
him superhuman attributes. But in spite of all this the fact remains
that Confucius has not been appointed a god and holds no _exequatur_
entitling him to that rank.

If we inquire into the reason of this we find that, astonishing
though it may seem, Confucius is classed by the Chinese not as a god
(_shen_), but as a demon (_kuei_). A short historical statement will
make the matter clear.

In the classical _Li chi, Book of Ceremonial_, we find the categorical
assignment of the worship of certain objects to certain subjective
beings: the emperor worshipped Heaven and earth, the feudal princes the
mountains and rivers, the officials the hearth, and the _literati_
their ancestors. Heaven, earth, mountains, rivers, and hearth
were called _shen_ (gods), and ancestors _kuei_ (demons). This
distinction is due to Heaven being regarded as the god and the
people as demons--the upper is the god, the lower the evil spirit or
demon. Though _kuei_ were usually bad, the term in Chinese includes
both good and evil spirits. In ancient times those who had by their
meritorious virtue while in the world averted calamities from the
people were posthumously worshipped and called gods, but those who were
worshipped by their descendants only were called spirits or demons.

In the worship of Confucius by emperors of various dynasties (details
of which need not be given here) the highest titles conferred on him
were _Hsien Sheng_, 'Former or Ancestral Saint,' and even _Win Hsuean
Wang_, 'Accomplished and Illustrious Prince,' and others containing
like epithets. When for his image or idol there was (in the eleventh
year--A.D. 1307--of the reign-period Ta Te of the Emperor Ch'eng
Tsung of the Yuean dynasty) substituted the tablet now seen in the
Confucian temples, these were the inscriptions engraved on it. In the
inscriptions authoritatively placed on the tablets the word _shen_
does not occur; in those cases where it does occur it has been
placed there (as by the Taoists) illegally and without authority
by too ardent devotees. Confucius may not be called a _shen_, since
there is no record showing that the great ethical teacher was ever
apotheosized, or that any order was given that the character _shen_
was to be applied to him.









