An Avatar of P'an Ku








According to the tradition of Chin Hung, the God of T'ai Shan
of the fifth generation from P'an Ku, this being, then called
Yuean-shih T'ien-wang, was an avatar of P'an Ku. It came about in
this wise. In remote ages there lived on the mountains an old man,
Yuean-shih T'ien-wang, who used to sit on a rock and preach to the
multitude. He spoke of the highest antiquity as if from personal
experience. When Chin Hung asked him where he lived, he just raised
his hand toward Heaven, iridescent clouds enveloped his body, and he
replied: "Whoso wishes to know where I dwell must rise to impenetrable
heights." "But how," said Chin Hung, "was he to be found in this
immense emptiness?" Two genii, Ch'ih Ching-tzu and Huang Lao, then
descended on the summit of T'ai Shan and said: "Let us go and visit
this Yuean-shih. To do so, we must cross the boundaries of the universe
and pass beyond the farthest stars." Chin Hung begged them to give
him their instructions, to which he listened attentively. They then
ascended the highest of the sacred peaks, and thence mounted into the
heavens, calling to him from the misty heights: "If you wish to know
the origin of Yuean-shih, you must pass beyond the confines of Heaven
and earth, because he lives beyond the limits of the worlds. You must
ascend and ascend until you reach the sphere of nothingness and of
being, in the plains of the luminous shadows."

Having reached these ethereal heights, the two genii saw a bright
light, and Hsuean-hsuean Shang-jen appeared before them. The two
genii bowed to do him homage and to express their gratitude. "You
cannot better show your gratitude," he replied, "than by making my
doctrine known among men. You desire," he added, "to know the history
of Yuean-shih. I will tell it you. When P'an Ku had completed his
work in the primitive Chaos, his spirit left its mortal envelope
and found itself tossed about in empty space without any fixed
support. 'I must,' it said, 'get reborn in visible form; until I can
go through a new birth I shall remain empty and unsettled,' His soul,
carried on the wings of the wind, reached Fu-yue T'ai. There it saw
a saintly lady named T'ai Yuean, forty years of age, still a virgin,
and living alone on Mount Ts'u-o. Air and variegated clouds were
the sole nourishment of her vital spirits. An hermaphrodite, at
once both the active and the passive principle, she daily scaled the
highest peak of the mountain to gather there the flowery quintessence
of the sun and the moon. P'an Ku, captivated by her virgin purity,
took advantage of a moment when she was breathing to enter her mouth
in the form of a ray of light. She was _enceinte_ for twelve years,
at the end of which period the fruit of her womb came out through her
spinal column. From its first moment the child could walk and speak,
and its body was surrounded by a five-coloured cloud. The newly-born
took the name of Yuean-shih T'ien-wang, and his mother was generally
known as T'ai-yuean Sheng-mu, 'the Holy Mother of the First Cause.'"









