Golden Dragon Great Prince








On reading the letter the King wept, and all the courtiers followed
his example. "Stop wailing," said the King, "lest Ch'ien-t'ang
hear." "Who is Ch'ien-t'ang?" asked Liu I. "He is my dear brother,"
replied the King; "formerly he was one of the chief administrators of
the Ch'ien-t'ang River; now he is the chief God of Rivers." "Why are
you so afraid that he might hear what I have just told you?" "Because
he has a terrible temper. It was he who, in the reign of Yao, caused
a nine-years flood."

Before he had finished speaking, a red dragon, a thousand feet long,
with red scales, mane of fire, bloody tongue, and eyes blazing
like lightning, passed through the air with rapid flight and
disappeared. Barely a few moments had elapsed when it returned with
a young woman whom Liu I recognized as the one who had entrusted him
with the letter. The Dragon-king, overjoyed, said to him: "This is my
daughter; her husband is no more, and she offers you her hand." Liu
did not dare to accept, since it appeared that they had just killed
her husband. He took his departure, and married a woman named Chang,
who soon died. He then married another named Han, who also died. He
then went to live at Nanking, and, his solitude preying upon his
spirits, he decided to marry yet again. A middleman spoke to him of a
girl of Fang Yang, in Chihli, whose father, Hao, had been Magistrate
of Ch'ing Liu, in Anhui. This man was always absent on his travels,
no one knew whither. The girl's mother, Cheng, had married her two
years before to a man named Chang of Ch'ing Ho, in Chihli, who had
just died. Distressed at her daughter being left a widow so young,
the mother wished to find another husband for her.

Liu I agreed to marry this young woman, and at the end of a year
they had a son. She then said to her husband: "I am the daughter
of the King of the Tung-t'ing Lake. It was you who saved me from
my miserable plight on the bank of the Ching, and I swore I would
reward you. Formerly you refused to accept my hand, and my parents
decided to marry me to the son of a silk-merchant. I cut my hair,
and never ceased to hope that I might some time or other be united
to you in order that I might show you my gratitude."

In A.D. 712, in the reign-period K'ai-yuean of the Emperor Hsuean Tsung
of the T'ang dynasty, they both returned to the Tung-t'ing Lake;
but the legend says nothing further with regard to them.

Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler, conferred on Liu I the title of Chin
Lung Ta Wang, 'Golden Dragon Great Prince.'









