The Wild Men








The wild beasts of the mountain have a king. He is a wild man, with
long, thick locks, fiery red in colour, and his body is covered with
hair. He is very strong: with a single blow of his huge fist, he can
break large rocks to pieces; he also can pull up the trees of the
forest by the root. His flesh is as hard as iron and is invulnerable
to the thrusts of knife, spear, or sword. He rides upon a tiger when
he leaves his home; he rules over the wolves, leopards, and tigers, and
governs all their affairs. Many other wild men, like him in appearance,
live in these mountains, but on account of his great strength he alone
is king. These wild men kill and eat all human beings they meet, and
other hill tribes live in terror of meeting them. Indeed, who of all
these mountain people would have been left alive had not some men,
more crafty than their fellows, devised a means of overpowering these
fierce savages?

This is the method referred to: On leaving his home the herb-gatherer
of the mountains arms himself with two large hollow bamboo tubes which
he slips over his wrists and arms; he also carries a jar of very
strong wine. When he meets one of the wild men he stands still and
allows the giant to grasp him by the arm. As the giant holds him fast,
as he supposes, in his firm grasp, he quietly and slowly withdraws
one arm from the bamboo cuff, and, taking the pot of wine from the
other hand, quickly pours it down the throat of the stooping giant,
whose mouth is wide open with immoderate laughter at the thought of
having captured a victim so easily. The potent draught of wine acts
at once, causing the victim to drop to the ground in a dead sleep,
whereupon the herb-gatherer either dispatches him summarily with a
thrust through the heart, or leaves the drunken tyrant to sleep off the
effect of his draught, while he returns again to his work of collecting
the health-restoring herbs. In this way have the numbers of these wild
men become less and less, until at the present time but few remain.









