The Cursed Temple








The reign of Ch'ung Cheng, the last monarch of the Ming dynasty,
was much troubled both by internal broils and by wars. He was
constantly threatened by Tartar hordes from without, though these
were generally beaten back by the celebrated general Wu San-kuei,
and the country was perpetually in a state of anarchy and confusion,
being overrun by bands of marauding rebels; indeed, so bold did
these become under a chief named Li Tzu-ch'eng that they actually
marched on the capital with the avowed intention of placing their
leader on the Dragon Throne. Ch'ung Cheng, on the reception of this
startling news, with no one that he could trust in such an emergency
(for Wu San-kuei was absent on an expedition against the Tartars),
was at his wits' end. The insurgents were almost in sight of Peking,
and at any moment might arrive. Rebellion threatened in the city
itself. If he went out boldly to attack the oncoming rebels his own
troops might go over to the enemy, or deliver him into their hands;
if he stayed in the city the people would naturally attribute it to
pusillanimity, and probably open the gates to the rebels.

In this strait he resolved to go to the San Kuan Miao, an imperial
temple situated near the Ch'ao-yang Men, and inquire of the gods as
to what he should do, and decide his fate by 'drawing the slip.' If he
drew a long slip, this would be a good omen, and he would boldly march
out to meet the rebels, confident of victory; if a middle length one,
he would remain quietly in the palace and passively await whatever
might happen; but if he should unfortunately draw a short one he would
take his own life rather than suffer death at the hands of the rebels.

Upon arrival at the temple, in the presence of the high officers of
his Court, the sacrifices were offered up, and the incense burnt,
previous to drawing the slip on which hung the destiny of an empire,
while Ch'ung Cheng himself remained on his knees in prayer. At the
conclusion of the sacrificial ceremony the tube containing the bamboo
fortune-telling sticks was placed in the Emperor's hand by one of
the priests. His courtiers and the attendant priests stood round in
breathless suspense, watching him as he swayed the tube to and fro;
at length one fell to the ground; there was dead silence as it was
raised by a priest and handed to the Emperor. _It was a short one!_
Dismay fell on every one present, no one daring to break the painful,
horrible silence. After a pause the Emperor, with a cry of mingled
rage and despair, dashed the slip to the ground, exclaiming: "May this
temple built by my ancestors evermore be accursed! Henceforward may
every suppliant be denied what he entreats, as I have been! Those
who come in sorrow, may that sorrow be doubled; in happiness, may
that happiness be changed to misery; in hope, may they meet despair;
in health, sickness; in the pride of life and strength, death! I,
Ch'ung Cheng, the last of the Mings, curse it!"

Without another word he retired, followed by his courtiers, proceeded
at once to the palace, and went straight to the apartments of the
Empress. The next morning he and his Empress were found suspended from
a tree on Prospect Hill. "In their death they were not divided." The
scenes that followed; how the rebels took possession of the city and
were driven out again by the Chinese general, assisted by the Tartars;
how the Tartars finally succeeded in establishing the Manchu dynasty,
are all matters of history. The words used by the Emperor at the
temple were prophetic; he _was_ the last of the Mings. The tree on
which the monarch of a mighty Empire closed his career and brought
the Ming dynasty to an end was ordered to be surrounded with chains;
it still exists, and is still in chains. Upward of two hundred
and seventy years have passed since that time, yet the temple is
standing as of old; but the halls that at one time were crowded with
worshippers are now silent, no one ever venturing to worship there;
it is the resort of the fox and the bat, and people at night pass it
shudderingly--"It is the cursed temple!"









