The Herdsman and the Weaver-girl








In the myths and legends which have clustered about the observations of
the stars by the Chinese there are subjects for pictorial illustration
without number. One of these stories is the fable of Aquila and Vega,
known in Chinese mythology as the Herdsman and the Weaver-girl. The
latter, the daughter of the Sun-god, was so constantly busied with her
loom that her father became worried at her close habits and thought
that by marrying her to a neighbour, who herded cattle on the banks
of the Silver Stream of Heaven (the Milky Way), she might awake to
a brighter manner of living.

No sooner did the maiden become wife than her habits and character
utterly changed for the worse. She became not only very merry and
lively, but quite forsook loom and needle, giving up her nights
and days to play and idleness; no silly lover could have been more
foolish than she. The Sun-king, in great wrath at all this, concluded
that the husband was the cause of it, and determined to separate the
couple. So he ordered him to remove to the other side of the river of
stars, and told him that hereafter they should meet only once a year,
on the seventh night of the seventh month. To make a bridge over the
flood of stars, the Sun-king called myriads of magpies, who thereupon
flew together, and, making a bridge, supported the poor lover on
their wings and backs as if on a roadway of solid land. So, bidding
his weeping wife farewell, the lover-husband sorrowfully crossed the
River of Heaven, and all the magpies instantly flew away. But the two
were separated, the one to lead his ox, the other to ply her shuttle
during the long hours of the day with diligent toil, and the Sun-king
again rejoiced in his daughter's industry.

At last the time for their reunion drew near, and only one fear
possessed the loving wife. What if it should rain? For the River
of Heaven is always full to the brim, and one extra drop causes a
flood which sweeps away even the bird-bridge. But not a drop fell;
all the heavens were clear. The magpies flew joyfully in myriads,
making a way for the tiny feet of the little lady. Trembling with joy,
and with heart fluttering more than the bridge of wings, she crossed
the River of Heaven and was in the arms of her husband. This she did
every year. The husband stayed on his side of the river, and the
wife came to him on the magpie bridge, save on the sad occasions
when it rained. So every year the people hope for clear weather,
and the happy festival is celebrated alike by old and young.

These two constellations are worshipped principally by women, that
they may gain cunning in the arts of needlework and making of fancy
flowers. Water-melons, fruits, vegetables, cakes, etc., are placed
with incense in the reception-room, and before these offerings are
performed the kneeling and the knocking of the head on the ground in
the usual way.









