A Rod of Iron








Sun, after his return to Hua-kuo Shan, slew the demon Hun-shih Mo-wang,
who had been molesting the monkeys during his long absence. Then he
organized his subjects into a regular army, 47,000 all told. Thus the
peace of the simian kingdom was assured. As for himself, he could
not find a weapon to suit him, and went to consult Ao Kuang, the
Lung Wang, or Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea, about it. It was from
him that he obtained the formidable rod of iron, formerly planted in
the ocean-bed by the Great Yue (Yue Wang) to regulate the level of the
waters. He pulled it out, and modified it to suit his tastes. The
two extremities he bound round with gold bands, and on it engraved
the words: 'Gold-bound Wand of my Desires.' This magic weapon could
accommodate itself to all his wishes; being able to assume the most
incredible proportions or to reduce itself to the form of the finest of
needles, which he kept hidden in his ear. He terrorized the Four Kings
of the sea, and dressed himself at their expense. The neighbouring
kings allied themselves with him. A splendid banquet with copious
libations of wine sealed the alliance of friendship with the seven
kings; but alas! Sun had partaken so liberally that when he was seeing
his guests off, no sooner had he taken a few steps than he fell into a
drunken sleep. The undertakers of Yen Wang, the King of the Hells, to
whom Lung Wang had accused him as the disturber of his watery kingdom,
seized his soul, put chains round its neck, and led it down to the
infernal regions. Sun awoke in front of the gate of the kingdom of
the dead, broke his fetters, killed his two custodians, and, armed
with his magic staff, penetrated into the realm of Yen Wang, where
he threatened to carry out general destruction. He called to the ten
infernal gods to bring him the Register of the Living and the Dead,
tore out with his own hand the page on which were written his name
and those of his monkey subjects, and then told the King of the Hells
that he was no longer subject to the laws of death. Yen Wang yielded,
though with bad grace, and Sun returned triumphant from his expedition
beyond the tomb.

Before long Sun's escapades came to the knowledge of Yue Huang. Ao
Kuang and Yen Wang each sent deputies to the Master of Heaven, who
took note of the double accusation, and sent T'ai-po Chin-hsing to
summon before him this disturber of the heavenly peace.









