Shooting the Heavenly Dog








In the family sleeping-apartments in Chinese houses hang pictures
of Chang Hsien, a white-faced, long-bearded man with a little boy by
his side, and in his hand a bow and arrow, with which he is shooting
the Heavenly Dog. The dog is the Dog-star, and if the 'fate' of the
family is under this star there will be no son, or the child will be
short-lived. Chang Hsien is the patron of child-bearing women, and was
worshipped under the Sung dynasty by women desirous of offspring. The
introduction of this name into the Chinese pantheon is due to an
incident in the history of Hua-jui Fu-jen, a name given to Lady Fei,
concubine of Meng Ch'ang, the last ruler of the Later Shu State,
A.D. 935-964. When she was brought from Shu to grace the harem of
the founder of the Sung dynasty, in A.D. 960, she is said to have
preserved secretly the portrait of her former lord, the Prince of Shu,
whose memory she passionately cherished. Jealously questioned by her
new consort respecting her devotion to this picture, she declared it
to be the representation of Chang Hsien, the divine being worshipped
by women desirous of offspring. Opinions differ as to the origin
of the worship. One account says that the Emperor Jen Tsung, of the
Sung dynasty, saw in a dream a beautiful young man with white skin
and black hair, carrying a bow in his hand. He said to the Emperor:
"The star T'ien Kou, Heavenly Dog, in the heavens is hiding the
sun and moon, and on earth devouring small children. It is only my
presence which keeps him at bay."

On waking, the Emperor at once ordered the young man's portrait to
be painted and exhibited, and from that time childless families would
write the name Chang Hsien on tablets and worship them.

Another account describes Chang Hsien as the spirit of the star
Chang. In the popular representations Chang Hsien is seen in the
form of a distinguished personage drawing a bow. The spirit of the
star Chang is supposed to preside over the kitchen of Heaven and to
arrange the banquets given by the gods.









