Wild Tribes of Mindanao Introduction


About one thousand miles to the south and east of the Tinguian and
Igorot is the Island of Mindanao, which is inhabited by mortals and
immortals entirely unknown to the mountain tribes of the north.

In the northern part of this great island are the Bukidnon--timid,
wild people who, attacked from time to time by the Moro on one side
and the Manobo on the other, have drawn back into scattered homes
in the hills. Here they live in poor dwellings raised high from the
ground. Some even build in trees, their sheltered and secret positions
making them less subject to attack.

They are not a warlike people, and their greatest concern is for the
good will of the numerous spirits who watch over their every act. At
times they gather a little hemp or coffee from the hillside or along
the stream bank and carry it to the coast to exchange for the bright
cloth which they make into gay clothes. But they do not love work,
and the most of their time is spent in resting or attending ceremonies
made to gain the good will of the immortals.

In this country the belief prevails that there are spirits in the
stones, in the baliti trees, in the vines, the cliffs, and even the
caves. And never does a man start on a journey or make a clearing on
the mountain side until he has first besought these spirits not to be
angry with him but to favor him with prosperity and bring good crops.

The greatest of the spirits is Diwata Magbabaya, who is so
awe-inspiring that his name is never mentioned above a whisper. He
lives in the sky in a house made of coins, and there are no windows
in this building, for if men should look upon him they would melt
into water.

About the Gulf of Davao, in the southeastern part of this island,
are a number of small tribes, each differing somewhat from the other
in customs and beliefs. Of these the most influential are the Bagobo
who dwell on the lower slopes of Mt. Apo, the highest peak in the
Philippines. They are very industrious, forging excellent knives,
casting fine articles in brass, and weaving beautiful hemp cloth which
they make into elaborate garments decorated with beads and shell disks.

The men are great warriors, each gaining distinction among his people
according to the number of human lives he has taken. A number of them
dress in dark red suits and peculiar headbands which they are permitted
to wear only after they have taken six lives. Notwithstanding their
bravery in battle, these people fear and have great respect for the
numerous spirits who rule over their lives.

From a great fissure in the side of Mt. Apo, clouds of sulphur fumes
are constantly rising, and it is believed to be in this fissure that
Mandarangan and his wife Darago live--evil beings who look after the
fortunes of the warriors. These spirits are feared and great care
is taken to appease them with offerings, while once a year a human
sacrifice is made to them.

The following tales show something of the beliefs of these and the
neighboring tribes in Mindanao.



How the Moon and the Stars Came to Be

)


One day in the times when the sky was close to the ground a spinster
went out to pound rice.  Before she began her work, she took
off the beads from around her neck and the comb from her hair, and
hung them on the sky, which at that time looked like coral rock.

Then she began working, and each time that she raised her pestle into
the air it struck the sky. For some time she pounded the rice, and
then she raised the pestle so high that it struck the sky very hard.

Immediately the sky began to rise,  and it went up so far that
she lost her ornaments. Never did they come down, for the comb became
the moon and the beads are the stars that are scattered about.



The Flood Story

)


A long time ago there was a very big crab  which crawled into
the sea. And when he went in he crowded the water out so that it ran
all over the earth and covered all the land.

Now about one moon before this happened, a wise man had told the people
that they must build a large raft.  They did as he commanded and
cut many large trees, until they had enough to make three layers. These
they bound tightly together, and when it was done they fastened the
raft with a long rattan cord to a big pole in the earth.

Soon after this the floods came. White water poured out of the hills,
and the sea rose and covered even the highest mountains. The people
and animals on the raft were safe, but all the others drowned.

When the waters went down and the raft was again on the ground,
it was near their old home, for the rattan cord had held.

But these were the only people left on the whole earth.



Magbangal 

)


Magbangal was a good hunter, and he often went to a certain hill
where he killed wild pigs for food. One night as it was nearing the
planting season, he sat in his house thinking, and after a long time
he called to his wife. She came to him, and he said:

"Tomorrow I shall go to the hill and clear the land for our planting,
but I wish you to stay here."

"Oh, let me go with you," begged his wife, "for you have no other
companion."

"No," said Magbangal, "I wish to go alone, and you must stay at home."

So finally his wife agreed, and in the morning she arose early to
prepare food for him. When the rice was cooked and the fish ready
she called him to come and eat, but he said:

"No, I do not want to eat now, but I will return this afternoon and
you must have it ready for me."

Then he gathered up his ten hatchets and bolos,  a sharpening
stone, and a bamboo tube for water, and started for the hill. Upon
reaching his land he cut some small trees to make a bench. When it
was finished, he sat down on it and said to the bolos, "You bolos must
sharpen yourselves on the stone." And the bolos went to the stone and
were sharpened. Then to the hatchets he said, "You hatchets must be
sharpened," and they also sharpened themselves.

When all were ready, he said: "Now you bolos cut all the small brush
under the trees, and you hatchets must cut the large trees." So the
bolos and the hatchets went to work, and from his place on the bench
Magbangal could see the land being cleared.

Magbangal's wife was at work in their house weaving a skirt, but
when she heard the trees continually falling she stopped to listen
and thought to herself, "My husband must have found many people to
help him clear our land. When he left here, he was alone, but surely
he cannot cut down the trees so fast. I will see who is helping him."

She left the house and walked rapidly toward the field, but as she
drew nearer she proceeded more slowly, and finally stopped behind
a tree. From her hiding-place, she could see her husband asleep on
the bench, and she could also see that the bolos and hatchets were
cutting the trees with no hands to guide them.

"Oh," said she, "Magbangal is very powerful. Never before have I
seen bolos and hatchets working without hands, and he never told me
of his power."

Suddenly she saw her husband jump up, and, seizing a bolo, he cut
off one of his own arms. He awoke and sat up and said:

"Someone must be looking at me, for one of my arms is cut off."

When he saw his wife he knew that she was the cause of his losing
his arm, and as they went home together, he exclaimed:

"Now I am going away. It is better for me to go to the sky where I
can give the sign to the people when it is time to plant; and you
must go to the water and become a fish."

Soon after he went to the sky and became the constellation Magbangal;
and ever since, when the people see these stars appear in the sky,
they know that it is time to plant their rice.



How Children Became Monkeys

)


One day a mother took her two children with her when she went to
color cloth. Not far from her home was a mud hole  where the
carabao liked to wallow, and to this hole she carried her cloth,
some dye pots, and two shell spoons.

After she had put the cloth into the mud to let it take up the dark
color, she built a fire and put over it a pot containing water and
the leaves used for dyeing. Then she sat down to wait for the water
to boil, while the children played near by.

By and by when she went to stir the leaves with a shell spoon, some
of the water splashed up and burned her hand, so that she jumped and
cried out. This amused the children and their laughter changed them
into monkeys, and the spoons became their tails. 

The nails of the monkeys are still black, because while they were
children they had helped their mother dye the cloth.



Bulanawan and Aguio

)


Langgona and his wife had twin boys named Bulanawan and Aguio. One
day, when they were about two years old, the mother took Bulanawan to
the field with her when she went to pick cotton. She spread the fiber
she had gathered the day before on the ground to dry near the child,
and while she was getting more a great wind suddenly arose which
wound the cotton around the baby and carried him away. Far away to
a distant land the wind took Bulanawan, and in that place he grew
up. When he was a man, he became a great warrior. 

One day while Bulanawan and his wife were walking along the seashore,
they sat down to rest on a large, flat rock, and Bulanawan fell
asleep. Now Aguio, the twin brother of Bulanawan, had become a great
warrior also, and he went on a journey to this distant land, not
knowing that his brother was there. It happened that he was walking
along the seashore in his war-dress   on this same day, and when
he saw the woman sitting on the large, flat rock, he thought her very
beautiful, and he determined to steal her.

As he drew near he asked her to give him some of her husband's
betel-nut to chew, and when she refused he went forward to fight her
husband, not knowing they were brothers. As soon as his wife awakened
him Bulanawan sprang up, seized her, put her in the cuff of his sleeve,
 and came forth ready to fight. Aguio grew very angry at this, and
they fought until their weapons were broken, and the earth trembled.

Now the two brothers of the rivals felt the earth tremble although they
were far away, and each feared that his brother was in trouble. One
was in the mountains and he started at once for the sea; the other was
in a far land, but he set out in a boat for the scene of the trouble.

They arrived at the same time at the place of battle, and they
immediately joined in it. Then the trembling of the earth increased
so much that Langgona, the father of Aguio and Bulanawan, sought out
the spot and tried to make peace. But he only seemed to make matters
worse, and they all began fighting him. So great did the disturbance
become that the earth was in danger of falling to pieces.

Then it was that the father of Langgona came and settled the trouble,
and when all were at peace again they discovered that Aguio and
Bulanawan were brothers and the grandsons of the peacemaker.



Origin

)


In the beginning there lived one man and one woman, Toglai and
Toglibon. Their first children were a boy and a girl. When they were
old enough, the boy and the girl went far away across the waters
seeking a good place to live in. Nothing more was heard of them until
their children, the Spaniards and Americans, came back. After the
first boy and girl left, other children were born to the couple,
but they all remained at Cibolan on Mt. Apo with their parents,
until Toglai and Toglibon died and became spirits.

Soon after that there came a great drought which lasted for three
years. All the waters dried up, so that there were no rivers, and no
plants could live.

"Surely," said the people, "Manama is punishing us and we must go
elsewhere to find food and a place to dwell in."

So they started out. Two went in the direction of the sunset, carrying
with them stones from Cibolan River. After a long journey they reached
a place where were broad fields of cogon grass and an abundance of
water, and there they made their home. Their children still live in
that place and are called Magindanau, because of the stones which
the couple carried when they left Cibolan.

Two children of Toglai and Toglibon went to the south, seeking a home,
and they carried with them women's baskets (baraan). When they found a
good spot, they settled down. Their descendants, still dwelling at that
place, are called Baraan or Bilaan, because of the women's baskets.

So two by two the children of the first couple left the land of their
birth. In the place where each settled a new people developed, and
thus it came about that all the tribes in the world received their
names from things that the people carried out of Cibolan, or from
the places where they settled.

All the children left Mt. Apo save two (a boy and a girl), whom hunger
and thirst had made too weak to travel. One day when they were about
to die the boy crawled out to the field to see if there was one
living thing, and to his surprise he found a stalk of sugar-cane
growing lustily. He eagerly cut it, and enough water came out to
refresh him and his sister until the rains came. Because of this,
their children are called Bagobo. 



Lumabet

)


Soon after people were created on the earth, there was born a child
named Lumabet, who lived to be a very, very old man. He could talk
when he was but one day old, and all his life he did wonderful things
until the people came to believe that he had been sent by Manama,
the Great Spirit.

When Lumabet was still a young man he had a fine dog, and he enjoyed
nothing so much as taking him to the mountains to hunt. One day the dog
noticed a white deer. Lumabet and his companions started in pursuit,
but the deer was very swift and they could not catch it. On and on
they went until they had gone around the world, and still the deer
was ahead. One by one his companions dropped out of the chase, but
Lumabet would not give up until he had the deer.

All the time he had but one banana and one camote (sweet potato)
for food, but each night he planted the skins of these, and in the
morning he found a banana tree with ripe fruit and a sweet potato
large enough to eat. So he kept on until he had been around the world
nine times, and he was an old man and his hair was gray. At last he
caught the deer, and then he called all the people to a great feast,
to see the animal.

While all were making merry, Lumabet told them to take a knife and
kill his father. They were greatly surprised, but did as he commanded,
and when the old man was dead, Lumabet waved his headband over him
and he came to life again. Eight times they killed the old man at
Lumabet's command, and the eighth time he was small like a little boy,
for each time they had cut off some of his flesh. They all wondered
very much at Lumabet's power, and they were certain that he was a god.

One morning some spirits came to talk with Lumabet, and after they
had gone he called the people to come into his house.

"We cannot all come in," said the people, "for your house is small
and we are many."

"There is plenty of room," said he; so all went in and to their
surprise it did not seem crowded.

Then he told the people that he was going on a long journey and that
all who believed he had great power could go with him, while all
who remained behind would be changed into animals and buso. 
He started out, many following him, and it was as he said. For those
that refused to go were immediately changed into animals and buso.

He led the people far away across the ocean to a place where the earth
and the sky meet. When they arrived they saw that the sky moved up
and down like a man opening and closing his jaws.

"Sky, you must go up," commanded Lumabet.

But the sky would not obey. So the people could not go through. Finally
Lumabet promised the sky that if he would let all the others through,
he might have the last man who tried to pass. Agreeing to this,
the sky opened and the people entered. But when near the last the
sky shut down so suddenly that he caught not only the last man but
also the long knife of the man before.

On that same day, Lumabet's son, who was hunting, did not know that
his father had gone to the sky. When he was tired of the chase, he
wanted to go to his father, so he leaned an arrow against a baliti tree
and sat down on it. Slowly it began to go down and carried him to his
father's place, but when he arrived he could find no people. He looked
here and there and could find nothing but a gun made of gold. 
This made him very sorrowful and he did not know what to do until
some white bees which were in the house said to him:

"You must not weep, for we can take you to the sky where your
father is."

So he did as they bade, and rode on the gun, and the bees flew away
with him, until in three days they reached the sky.

Now, although most of the men who followed Lumabet were content to
live in the sky, there was one who was very unhappy, and all the time
he kept looking down on the land below. The spirits made fun of him
and wanted to take out his intestines so that he would be like them
and never die, but he was afraid and always begged to be allowed to
go back home.

Finally Manama told the spirits to allow him to go, so they made a
chain of the leaves of the karan grass and tied it to his legs. Then
they let him down slowly head first, and when he reached the ground
he was no longer a man but an owl. 



The Story of the Creation 

)


In the very beginning there lived a being so large that he can not
be compared with any known thing. His name was Melu,  and when
he sat on the clouds, which were his home, he occupied all the space
above. His teeth were pure gold, and because he was very cleanly
and continually rubbed himself with his hands, his skin became pure
white. The dead skin which he rubbed off his body  was placed
on one side in a pile, and by and by this pile became so large that
he was annoyed and set himself to consider what he could do with it.

Finally Melu decided to make the earth; so he worked very hard in
putting the dead skin into shape, and when it was finished he was so
pleased with it that he determined to make two beings like himself,
though smaller, to live on it.

Taking the remnants of the material left after making the earth he
fashioned two men but just as they were all finished except their
noses, Tau Tana from below the earth appeared and wanted to help him.

Melu did not wish any assistance, and a great argument ensued. Tau
Tana finally won his point and made the noses which he placed on the
people upside down. When all was finished, Melu and Tau Tana whipped
the forms until they moved. Then Melu went to his home above the
clouds, and Tau Tana returned to his place below the earth.

All went well until one day a great rain came, and the people on the
earth nearly drowned from the water which ran off their heads into
their noses. Melu, from his place on the clouds, saw their danger,
and he came quickly to earth and saved their lives by turning their
noses the other side up.

The people were very grateful to him, and promised to do anything
he should ask of them. Before he left for the sky, they told him
that they were very unhappy living on the great earth all alone, so
he told them to save all the hair from their heads and the dry skin
from their bodies and the next time he came he would make them some
companions. And in this way there came to be a great many people on
the earth.



In the Beginning

)


In the beginning there were four beings,  and they lived on an
island no larger than a hat. On this island there were no trees or
grass or any other living thing besides these four people and one
bird.  One day they sent this bird out across the waters to
see what he could find, and when he returned he brought some earth,
a piece of rattan, and some fruit.

Melu, the greatest of the four, took the soil and shaped it and beat
it with a paddle in the same manner in which a woman shapes pots of
clay, and when he finished he had made the earth. Then he planted
the seeds from the fruit, and they grew until there was much rattan
and many trees bearing fruit.

The four beings watched the growth for a long time and were well
pleased with the work, but finally Melu said:

"Of what use is this earth and all the rattan and fruit if there are
no people?"

And the others replied, "Let us make some people out of wax."

So they took some wax and worked long, fashioning it into forms,
but when they brought them to the fire the wax melted, and they saw
that men could not be made in that way.

Next they decided to try to use dirt in making people, and Melu and
one of his companions began working on that. All went well till they
were ready to make the noses. The companion, who was working on that
part, put them on upside down. Melu told him that the people would
drown if he left them that way, but he refused to change them.

When his back was turned, however, Melu seized the noses, one by one,
and turned them as they now are. But he was in such a hurry that he
pressed his finger at the root, and it left a mark in the soft clay
which you can still see on the faces of people.



The Children of the Limokon 

)


In the very early days before there were any people on the earth,
the limokon (a kind of dove)  were very powerful and could talk
like men though they looked like birds. One limokon laid two eggs, one
at the mouth of the Mayo River and one farther up its course. After
some time these eggs hatched, and the one at the mouth of the river
became a man, while the other became a woman.

The man lived alone on the bank of the river for a long time, but
he was very lonely and wished many times for a companion. One day
when he was crossing the river something was swept against his legs
with such force that it nearly caused him to drown. On examining it,
he found that it was a hair, and he determined to go up the river and
find whence it came. He traveled up the stream, looking on both banks,
until finally he found the woman, and he was very happy to think that
at last he could have a companion.

They were married and had many children, who are the Mandaya still
living along the Mayo River,




The Sun and the Moon

)


The Sun and the Moon were married, but the Sun was very ugly and
quarrelsome. One day he became angry at the Moon and started to chase
her. She ran very fast until she was some distance ahead of him, when
she grew tired and he almost caught her. Ever since he has been chasing
her, at times almost reaching her, and again falling far behind.

The first child of the Sun and Moon was a large star, and he was like
a man. One time the Sun, becoming angry at the star, cut him up into
small pieces and scattered him over the whole sky just as a woman
scatters rice, and ever since there have been many stars.

Another child of the Sun and Moon was a gigantic crab.  He still
lives and is so powerful that every time he opens and closes his eyes
there is a flash of lightning. Most of the time the crab lives in
a large hole in the bottom of the sea, and when he is there we have
high tide; but when he leaves the hole, the waters rush in and there
is low tide. His moving about also causes great waves on the surface
of the sea.

The crab is quarrelsome like his father; and he sometimes becomes so
angry with his mother, the Moon, that he tries to swallow her. 
When the people on earth, who are fond of the Moon, see the crab near
her, they run out of doors and shout and beat on gongs until he is
frightened away, and thus the Moon is saved.



The Widow's Son 

)


In a little house at the edge of a village lived a widow with her
only son, and they were very happy together. The son was kind to his
mother, and they made their living by growing rice in clearings on
the mountain side and by hunting wild pig in the forest.

One evening when their supply of meat was low, the boy said:

"Mother, I am going to hunt pig in the morning, and I wish you would
prepare rice for me before daylight."

So the widow rose early and cooked the rice, and at dawn the boy
started out with his spear and dog.

Some distance from the village, he entered the thick forest. He walked
on and on, ever on the lookout for game, but none appeared. At last
when he had traveled far and the sun was hot, he sat down on a rock to
rest and took out his brass box  to get a piece of betel-nut. He
prepared the nut and leaf for chewing, and as he did so he wondered
why it was that he had been so unsuccessful that day. But even as he
pondered he heard his dog barking sharply, and cramming the betel-nut
into his mouth he leaped up and ran toward the dog.

As he drew near he could see that the game was a fine large pig,
all black save its four legs which were white. He lifted his spear
and took aim, but before he could throw the pig started to run,
and instead of going toward a water course it ran straight up the
mountain. The boy went on in hot pursuit, and when the pig paused he
again took aim, but before he could throw it ran on.

Six times the pig stopped just long enough for the boy to take aim,
and then started on before he could throw. The seventh time, however,
it halted on the top of a large flat rock and the boy succeeded in
killing it.

He tied its legs together with a piece of rattan and was about to
start for home with the pig on his back, when to his surprise a door
in the large stone swung open and a man stepped out.

"Why have you killed my master's pig?" asked the man.

"I did not know that this pig belonged to anyone," replied the widow's
son. "I was hunting, as I often do, and when my dog found the pig I
helped him to catch it"

"Come in and see my master," said the man, and the boy followed him
into the stone where he found himself in a large room. The ceiling and
floor were covered with peculiar cloth that had seven wide stripes
of red alternating with a like number of yellow stripes. When the
master of the place appeared his trousers were of seven colors,
 as were also his jacket and the kerchief about his head.

The master ordered betel-nut, and when it was brought they chewed
together. Then he called for wine, and it was brought in a jar so
large that it had to be set on the ground under the house, and even
then the top came so high above the floor that they brought a seat
for the widow's son, and it raised him just high enough to drink
from the reed in the top of the jar. He drank seven cups of wine,
and then they ate rice and fish and talked together.

The master did not blame the boy for killing the pig, and declared that
he wished to make a brother of him. So they became friends, and the
boy remained seven days in the stone. At the end of that time, he said
that he must return to his mother who would be worried about him. In
the early morning he left the strange house and started for home.

At first he walked briskly, but as the morning wore on he went more
slowly, and finally when the sun was high he sat down on a rock to
rest. Suddenly looking up, he saw before him seven men each armed with
a spear, a shield, and a sword. They were dressed in different colors,
and each man had eyes the same color as his clothes. The leader, who
was dressed all in red with red eyes to match, spoke first, asking
the boy where he was going. The boy replied that he was going home
to his mother who would be looking for him, and added:

"Now I ask where you are going, all armed ready for war."

"We are warriors," replied the man in red. "And we go up and down the
world killing whatever we see that has life. Now that we have met you,
we must kill you also."

The boy, startled by this strange speech, was about to answer when he
heard a voice near him say: "Fight, for they will try to kill you,"
and upon looking up he saw his spear, shield, and sword which he had
left at home. Then he knew that the command came from a spirit, so he
took his weapons and began to fight. For three days and nights they
contended, and never before had the seven seen one man so brave. On
the fourth day the leader was wounded and fell dead, and then, one
by one, the other six fell.

When they were all killed, the widow's son was so crazed with fighting
that he thought no longer of returning home, but started out to find
more to slay.

In his wanderings he came to the home of a great giant whose house
was already full of the men he had conquered in battle, and he called
up from outside:

"Is the master of the house at home? If he is, let him come out
and fight."

This threw the giant into a rage, and seizing his shield and his
spear, the shaft of which was the trunk of a tree, he sprang to the
door and leaped to the ground, not waiting to go down the notched
pole which served for steps. He looked around for his antagonist,
and seeing only the widow's son he roared:

"Where is the man that wants to fight? That thing? It is only a fly!"

The boy did not stop to answer, but rushed at the giant with his knife;
and for three days and nights they struggled, till the giant fell,
wounded at the waist.

After that the widow's son stopped only long enough to burn the giant's
house, and then rushed on looking for someone else to slay. Suddenly
he again heard the voice which had bade him fight with the seven men,
and this time it said: "Go home now, for your mother is grieved at
your absence." In a rage he sprang forward with his sword, though he
could see no enemy. Then the spirit which had spoken to him made him
sleep for a short time. When he awoke the rage was spent.

Again the spirit appeared, and it said: "The seven men whom you killed
were sent to kill you by the spirit of the great stone, for he looked
in your hand and saw that you were to marry the orphan girl whom
he himself wished to wed. But you have conquered. Your enemies are
dead. Go home now and prepare a great quantity of wine, for I shall
bring your enemies to life again, and you will all live in peace."

So the widow's son went home, and his mother, who had believed him
dead, was filled with joy at his coming, and all the people in the town
came out to welcome him. When he had told them his story, they hastened
to get wine, and all day they bore jarsful to the widow's house.

That night there was a great feast, and the spirit of the great stone,
his seven warriors, the friendly spirit, and the giant all came. The
widow's son married the orphan girl, while another beautiful woman
became the wife of the spirit of the stone.





