THE CLEVER GOAT



The truth is Pekka, the Wolf, was a pretty stupid fellow always
getting into some scrape or other. With sore ribs and a back aching
from the beating which the farm folk had given him he slunk quietly
along the forest ways hoping to come upon some easy prey. Suddenly he
saw ahead of him a Goat and a Ram.

"What are they doing hereabouts?" he thought to himself. "This is no
place for them and if anything happens to them it will be their own
fault."

Vuhi, the Goat, and Dinas, the Ram, both knew that the forest was no
place for them. But where else could they go? They had recently been
turned loose to fend for themselves by their poor old master who was
no longer able to feed them.

"This forest rather frightens me," the Ram had said to the Goat. "Do
you suppose we'll be able to keep off the Wolves?"

Vuhi, the Goat, flirted his whiskers and said:

"I've got a plan."

Thereupon he took a sack and half filled it with dry chips. Then when
he shook the sack the chips made a hollow rattle. He threw the sack
over his shoulder and said to the Ram:

"Don't you be frightened, Dinas. We'll be able to hold our own with
the forest creatures."

It was just at this moment that Pekka, the Wolf, appeared.

"Ha! Ha!" said Pekka suspiciously. "What's that you've got in that
sack? No nonsense now! Answer me at once or I'll have to kill you
both!"

Vuhi, the Goat, gave the sack a little rattle.

"In this sack?" he said. "Oh, only the skulls and bones of the Wolves
we have eaten. We haven't had any Wolf meat now for some time, have
we, Dinas? It's good you've come along for we're hungry.... Attention,
Dinas! Kill the Wolf!"

The Ram lowered his horns ready for attack and Pekka, the Wolf, too
surprised to resist and too stiff to run away, cried out wildly:

"Brothers! Brothers! Don't kill me! I'm your friend! Spare me and I'll
do something for you!"

"Attention, Dinas!" the Goat commanded. "Don't kill the Wolf just
yet!"

Then he asked Pekka:

"What will you do for us if we spare you?"

"I'll send you twelve Wolves," Pekka promised. "That will give you
more meat than you'd have if you killed just me!"

"Twelve," the Goat replied. "You are right: twelve Wolves will give us
more meat than one. Very well, we'll let you go on condition that you
send us twelve. But see you keep your word!"

So the Wolf went off as fast as his stiff legs could carry him and
assembled twelve of his brothers.

"I've called you together," he said, "to warn you of two terrible
creatures, a Goat and a Ram, who are here in the forest eating up
Wolves! Already they have a sack full of our unfortunate relations'
skulls and bones! I saw the sack myself! Don't you think we ought all
of us to flee?"

"What!" said the other Wolves, "thirteen Wolves turn tail on one Goat
and one Ram? Never! We'll go together and give them battle!"

"Don't count me in!" Pekka said. "I don't want to see those two
again!"

So the twelve Wolves marched off without Pekka.

The Goat as he saw them coming ran up a tree. The Ram followed him but
couldn't get very high.

The twelve Wolves came under the tree and standing in close formation
called out:

"Now then, you two, come on! We're ready for you!"

"Attention, Dinas!" the Goat commanded. "They're all here, so lose no
more time! Jump down among them and kill them!"

The Goat himself began climbing down the tree, at the same time making
an awful noise with his sack. He gave the Ram a push and the Ram
slipped and fell right on the backs of the Wolves.

"That's right, Dinas! Kill them all!" the Goat shouted, rattling his
sack more furiously than ever. "Don't let one of them escape!"

In the confusion that followed the Wolves stampeded, running
helter-skelter in all directions. Every Wolf there felt that his own
escape was a piece of rare good fortune.

"Those terrible two!" he thought.

Thereafter Vuhi, the Goat, and Dinas, the Ram, lived on in the forest
untroubled by the Wolves.



