THE PARTNERS



The Bear and the Wolf and the Fox made houses quite close together and
the Wolf and the Fox decided to go into partnership.

"The first thing we ought to do," said Pekka, the Wolf, "is make a
clearing in the forest and plant some crops."

The Fox agreed and the very next day they started out to work. Each
had a crock with three pats of butter for his dinner. They left their
crocks in the cool water of a little spring in the forest not far from
the place where they had decided to make a clearing.

It was hard work felling trees and the Fox, soon tiring of it, made
some sort of excuse to run off. When he came back he said to the Wolf:

"Pekka, the folks at the Farm are having a christening and have sent
me an invitation to attend."

"It's too bad we're so busy to-day," the Wolf said. "Another day you
might have gone."

"But I must go," the Fox insisted. "They've been good neighbors to us
and they'd be insulted if I refused."

"Very well," the Wolf said, "if you feel that way about it you better
go. But hurry back for we have a lot to do."

So the Fox trotted off but he got no farther than the spring where the
butter crocks were cooling. He took the Wolf's crock and licked off
the top layer of butter. Then after a while he went back to the
clearing.

"Well, Mikko," the Wolf said, "is the christening over?"

"Yes, it's over."

"What did they name the child?"

"They named it Top."

"Top? That's a strange name!"

In a few moments the Fox again ran off and returned with the
announcement that there was to be another christening at the Farm and
again they wanted him to attend.

"Another christening!" the Wolf exclaimed. "How can that be?"

"This time the daughter has a baby."

"You're not going, are you, Mikko? You can't always be going to
christenings."

"That's true, Pekka, that's true," said the Fox, "but I think I must
go this time."

The Wolf sighed.

"You will hurry back, won't you? This work is too much for me alone."

"Yes, Pekka dear," the Fox promised, "I'll hurry back as quickly as I
can."

So he trotted off again to the spring and the Wolf's butter crock.
This time he ate the middle pat of the Wolf's butter, then slowly
sauntered back to the clearing.

"Well," said the Wolf, pausing a moment in his work, "what did they
name the baby this time?"

"This one they named Middle."

"Middle? That's a strange name to give a baby!"

For a few moments the Fox pretended to work hard. Then he ran off
again. When he came back, he said:

"Pekka, do you know they're having another christening at the Farm
and they say that I just must come."

"Another christening! Now, Mikko, that's too much! How can they be
having another christening?"

"Well, this time it's the daughter-in-law that has a baby."

"I don't care who it is," the Wolf said, "you just can't go. You've
got some work to do, you have!"

The Fox agreed:

"You're right, Pekka, you're right! I'm entirely too busy to be
running off all the time to christenings! I'd say, 'No!' in a minute
if it wasn't that we are new settlers and they are our nearest
neighbors. As it is I'm afraid they'd think it wasn't neighborly if I
didn't come. But I'll hurry back, I promise you!"

So for the third time the Fox trotted off to the little spring and
this time he licked the Wolf's butter crock clean to the bottom. Then
he went slowly back to the clearing and told the Wolf about the
christening and the baby.

"They've named this one Bottom," he said.

"Bottom!" the Wolf echoed. "What funny names they give children
nowadays!"

The Fox pretended to work hard for a few minutes, then threw himself
down exhausted.

"Heigh ho!" he said, with a yawn, "I'm so tired and hungry it must be
dinner time!"

The Wolf looked at the sun and said:

"Yes, I think we had better rest now and eat."

So they went to the spring and got their butter crocks. The Wolf found
that his had already been licked clean.

"Mikko!" he cried, "have you been at my butter?"

"Me?" the Fox said in a tone of great innocence. "How could I have
been at your butter when you know perfectly well that I've been
working right beside you all morning except when I was away at the
christenings? You must have eaten up your butter yourself!"

"Of course I haven't eaten it up myself!" the Wolf declared. "I just
bet anything you took it!"

The Fox pretended to be much aggrieved.

"Pekka, I won't have you saying such a thing! We must get at the
bottom of this! I tell you what we'll do: we'll both lie down in the
sun and the heat of the sun will melt the butter and make it run. Now
then, if butter runs out of my nose then I'm the one that has eaten
your butter; if it runs out of your nose, then you've eaten it
yourself. Do you agree to this test?"

The Wolf said, yes, he agreed, and at once lay down in the sun. He had
been working so hard that he was very tired and in a few moments he
was sound asleep. Thereupon the Fox slipped over and daubed a little
lump of butter on the end of his nose. The sun melted the butter and
then, of course, it looked as if it were running out of the Wolf's
nose.

"Wake up, Pekka! Wake up!" the Fox cried. "There's butter running out
of your nose!"

The Wolf awoke and felt his nose with his tongue.

"Why, Mikko," he said in surprise, "so there is! Well, I suppose I
must have eaten that butter myself but I give you my word for it I
don't remember doing it!"

"Well," said the Fox, pretending still to feel hurt, "you shouldn't
always suspect me."

When they went back to the clearing, the Wolf began pulling the brush
together to burn it up and the Fox slipped away and lay down behind
some brushes.

"Mikko! Mikko!" the Wolf called. "Aren't you going to help me burn the
brush?"

"You set it a-fire," the Fox called back, "and I'll stay here to guard
against any flying sparks. We don't want to burn down the whole
forest!"

So the Wolf burned up all the brush while the Fox took a pleasant nap.

Then when he was ready to plant the seed in the rich wood ashes, the
Wolf again called out to the Fox to come help him.

"You do the planting, Pekka," the Fox called back, "and I'll stay here
and frighten off the birds. If I don't they'll come and pick up every
seed you plant."

So Mikko, the rascal, took another nap while the poor Wolf planted the
field he had already cleared and burned.



