STORY OF THE ANAE-HOLO


The anae-holo is a species of mullet unlike the shallow water, or
pond, variety; and the following story of its habit is well known to
any _kupa_ (native born) of Oahu.

The home of the anae-holo is at Honouliuli, Pearl Harbor, at a
place called Ihuopalaai. They make periodical journeys around to
the opposite side of the island, starting from Puuloa and going to
windward, passing successively Kumumanu, Kalihi, Kou, Kalia, Waikiki,
Kaalawai and so on, around to the Koolau side, ending at Laie, and
then returning by the same course to their starting-point. This fish
is not caught at Waianae, Kaena, Waialua, Waimea, or Kahuku because
it does not run that way, though these places are well supplied with
other kinds. The reason given for this is as follows:

Ihuopalaai had a Ku-ula, and this fish god supplied anaes. Ihuopalaai's
sister took a husband and went and lived with him at Laie,
Koolauloa. In course of time a day came when there was no fish to
be had. In her distress and desire for some she bethought herself of
her brother, so she sent her husband to Honouliuli to ask Ihuopalaai
for a supply, saying: "Go to Ihuopalaai, my brother, and ask him for
fish. If he offers you dried fish, refuse it by all means;--do not
take it, because the distance is so long that you would not be able
to carry enough to last us for any length of time."

When her husband arrived at Honouliuli he went to Ihuopalaai and
asked him for fish. His brother-in-law gave him several large bundles
of dried fish, one of which he could not very well lift, let alone
carry a distance. This offer was refused and reply given according to
instruction. Ihuopalaai sat thinking for some time and then told him to
return home, saying: "You take the road on the Kona side of the island;
do not sit, stay, nor sleep on the way till you reach your own house."

The man started as directed, and Ihuopalaai asked Ku-ula to send fish
for his sister, and while the man was journeying homeward as directed
a school of fish was following in the sea, within the breakers. He
did not obey fully the words of Ihuopalaai, for he became so tired
that he sat down on the way; but he noticed that whenever he did so
the fish rested too. The people seeing the school of fish went and
caught some of them. Of course, not knowing that this was his supply,
he did not realize that the people were taking his fish. Reaching home,
he met his wife and told her he had brought no fish, but had seen many
all the way, and pointed out to her the school of anae-holo which was
then resting abreast of their house. She told him it was their supply,
sent by Ihuopalaai, his brother-in-law. They fished, and got all they
desired, whereupon the remainder returned by the same way till they
reached Honouliuli where Ihuopalaai was living. Ever afterward this
variety of fish has come and gone the same way every year to this day,
commencing some time in October and ending in March or April.

Expectant mothers are not allowed to eat of the anae-holo, nor the
aholehole, fearing dire consequences to the child, hence they never
touch them till after the eventful day. Nor are these fish ever
given to children till they are able to pick and eat them of their
own accord.



