HIKU AND KAWELU



Not far from the summit of Hualalai, on the island of Hawaii, in
the cave on the southern side of the ridge, lived Hina and her son,
the _kupua_, or demigod, Hiku. All his life long as a child and a
youth, Hiku had lived alone with his mother on this mountain summit,
and had never once been permitted to descend to the plains below to
see the abodes of men and to learn of their ways. From time to time,
his quick ear had caught the sound of the distant _hula_ (drum) and
the voices of the gay merrymakers. Often had he wished to see the
fair forms of those who danced and sang in those far-off cocoanut
groves. But his mother, more experienced in the ways of the world,
had never given her consent. Now, at length, he felt that he was a
man, and as the sounds of mirth arose on his ears, again he asked
his mother to let him go for himself and mingle with the people
on the shore. His mother, seeing that his mind was made up to go,
reluctantly gave her consent and warned him not to stay too long,
but to return in good time. So, taking in his hand his faithful arrow,
_Pua Ne_, which he always carried, he started off.

This arrow was a sort of talisman, possessed of marvellous powers,
among which were the ability to answer his call and by its flight to
direct his journey.

Thus he descended over the rough clinker lava and through the groves of
koa that cover the southwestern flank of the mountain, until, nearing
its base, he stood on a distant hill; and consulting his arrow, he shot
it far into the air, watching its bird-like flight until it struck
on a distant hill above Kailua. To this hill he rapidly directed his
steps, and, picking up his arrow in due time, he again shot it into the
air. The second flight landed the arrow near the coast of Holualoa,
some six or eight miles south of Kailua. It struck on a barren waste
of _pahoehoe_, or lava rock, beside the waterhole of _Waikalai_,
known also as the _Wai a Hiku_ (Water of Hiku), where to this day all
the people of that vicinity go to get their water for man and beast.

Here he quenched his thirst, and nearing the village of Holualoa, again
shot the arrow, which, instinct with life, entered the courtyard of
the _alii_ or chief, of Kona, and from among the women who were there
singled out the fair princess Kawelu, and landed at her feet. Seeing
the noble bearing of Hiku as he approached to claim his arrow, she
stealthily hid it and challenged him to find it. Then Hiku called
to the arrow, "_Pua ne! Pua ne!_" and the arrow replied, "_Ne!_"
thus revealing its hiding-place.

This exploit with the arrow and the remarkable grace and personal
beauty of the young man quite won the heart of the princess, and she
was soon possessed by a strong passion for him, and determined to
make him her husband.

With her wily arts she detained him for several days at her home,
and when at last he was about to start for the mountain, she shut
him up in the house and thus detained him by force. But the words
of his mother, warning him not to remain too long, came to his mind,
and he determined to break away from his prison. So he climbed up to
the roof, and removing a portion of the thatch, made his escape.

When his flight was discovered by Kawelu, the infatuated girl was
distracted with grief. Refusing to be comforted, she tasted no food,
and ere many days had passed was quite dead. Messengers were despatched
who brought back the unhappy Hiku, author of all this sorrow. Bitterly
he wept over the corpse of his beloved, but it was now too late; the
spirit had departed to the nether world, ruled over by Milu. And now,
stung by the reproaches of her kindred and friends for his desertion,
and urged on by his real love for the fair one, he resolved to attempt
the perilous descent into the nether world and, if possible, to bring
her spirit back.

With the assistance of her friends, he collected from the mountain
slope a great quantity of the _kowali_, or convolvulus vine. He also
prepared a hollow cocoanut shell, splitting it into two closely fitting
parts. Then anointing himself with a mixture of rancid cocoanut and
kukui oil, which gave him a very strong corpse-like odor, he started
with his companions in the well-loaded canoes for a point in the sea
where the sky comes down to meet the water.

Arrived at the spot, he directed his comrades to lower him into the
abyss called by the Hawaiians the _Lua o Milu_. Taking with him his
cocoanut-shell and seating himself astride of the cross-stick of the
swing, or kowali, he was quickly lowered down by the long rope of
kowali vines held by his friends in the canoe above.

Soon he entered the great cavern where the shades of the departed were
gathered together. As he came among them, their curiosity was aroused
to learn who he was. And he heard many remarks, such as "Whew! what
an odor this corpse emits!" "He must have been long dead." He had
rather overdone the matter of the rancid oil. Even Milu himself,
as he sat on the bank watching the crowd, was completely deceived by
the stratagem, for otherwise he never would have permitted this bold
descent of a living man into his gloomy abode.

The Hawaiian swing, it should be remarked, unlike ours, has but one
rope supporting the cross-stick on which the person is seated. Hiku
and his swing attracted considerable attention from the lookers-on. One
shade in particular watched him most intently; it was his sweetheart,
Kawelu. A mutual recognition took place, and with the permission of
Milu she darted up to him and swung with him on the kowali. But even
she had to avert her face on account of his corpse-like odor. As they
were enjoying together this favorite Hawaiian pastime of _lele kowali_,
by a preconcerted signal the friends above were informed of the success
of his ruse and were now rapidly drawing them up. At first she was too
much absorbed in the sport to notice this. When at length her attention
was aroused by seeing the great distance of those beneath her, like
a butterfly she was about to flit away, when the crafty Hiku, who was
ever on the alert, clapped the cocoanut-shells together, imprisoning
her within them, and was then quickly drawn up to the canoes above.

With their precious burden, they returned to the shores of Holualoa,
where Hiku landed and at once repaired to the house where still lay
the body of his beloved. Kneeling by its side, he made a hole in the
great toe of the left foot, into which with great difficulty he forced
the reluctant spirit, and in spite of its desperate struggles he tied
up the wound so that it could not escape from the cold, clammy flesh
in which it was now imprisoned. Then he began to _lomilomi_, or rub
and chafe the foot, working the spirit further and further up the limb.

Gradually, as the heart was reached, the blood began once more to flow
through the body, the chest began gently to heave with the breath
of life, and soon the spirit gazed out through the eyes. Kawelu was
now restored to consciousness, and seeing her beloved Hiku bending
tenderly over her, she opened her lips and said: "How could you be
so cruel as to leave me?"

All remembrance of the Lua o Milu and of her meeting him there had
disappeared, and she took up the thread of consciousness just where she
had left it a few days before at death. Great joy filled the hearts of
the people of Holualoa as they welcomed back to their midst the fair
Kawelu and the hero, Hiku, from whom she was no more to be separated.



