PI'S WATERCOURSE


Pi was an ordinary man living in Waimea, Kauai, who wanted to construct
a _mano_, or dam, across the Waimea River and a watercourse therefrom
to a point near Kikiaola. Having settled upon the best locations for
his proposed work, he went up to the mountains and ordered all the
Menehunes that were living near Puukapele to prepare stones for the
dam and watercourse. The Menehunes were portioned off for the work;
some to gather stones, and others to cut them. All the material was
ready in no time (_manawa ole_), and Pi settled upon the night when
the work was to be done. When the time came he went to the point where
the dam was to be built, and waited. At the dead of night he heard the
noise and hum of the voices of the Menehunes on their way to Kikiaola,
each of whom was carrying a stone. The dam was duly constructed,
every stone fitting in its proper place, and the stone _auwai_, or
watercourse, also laid around the bend of Kikiaola. Before the break
of day the work was completed, and the water of the Waimea River was
turned by the dam into the watercourse on the flat lands of Waimea.

When the work was finished Pi served out food for the Menehunes, which
consisted of shrimps (_opae_), this being the only kind to be had in
sufficient quantity to supply each with a fish to himself. They were
well supplied and satisfied, and at dawn returned to the mountains
of Puukapele rejoicing, and the hum of their voices gave rise to the
saying, "_Wawa ka Menehune i Puukapele, ma Kauai, puoho ka manu o
ka loko o Kawainui ma Koolaupoko, Oahu_"--the hum of the voices of
the Menehunes at Puukapele, Kauai, startled the birds of the pond of
Kawainui, at Koolaupoko Oahu.

The _auwai_, or watercourse, of Pi is still to be seen at Kikiaola.

At one time Pi also told the Menehunes to wall in a fish-pond at
the bend of the Huleia River. They commenced work toward midnight,
but at dawn the walls of the pond were not sufficiently finished to
meet, so it was left incomplete, and has remained so to this day.



