FISH STORIES AND SUPERSTITIONS



The following narration of the different fishes here given is told
and largely believed in by native fishermen. All may not agree as to
particulars in this version, but the main features are well known
and vary but little. Some of these stories are termed mythical, in
others the truth is never questioned, and together they have a deep
hold on the Hawaiian mind. Further and confirmatory information may
be obtained from fishermen and others, and by visiting the market
the varieties here mentioned may be seen almost daily.

In the olden time certain varieties of fish were tabooed and could
not be caught at all times, being subject to the kapu of Ku-ula, the
fish god, who propagated the finny tribes of Hawaiian waters. While
deep sea fishing was more general, that in the shallow sea, or along
shore, was subject to the restrictions of the konohiki of the land,
and aliis, both as to certain kinds and periods. The sign of the
shallow sea kapu was the placing of branches of the hau tree all along
the shore. The people seeing this token of the kapu respected it, and
any violation thereof in ancient times was said to be punishable by
death. While this kapu prevailed the people resorted to the deep sea
stations for their food supply. With the removal of the hau branches,
indicating that the kapu was lifted, the people fished as they desired,
subject only to the makahiki taboo days of the priest or alii, when
no canoes were allowed to go out upon the water.

The first fish caught by a fisherman, or any one else, was marked
and dedicated to Ku-ula. After this offering was made, Ku-ula's right
therein being thus recognized, they were free from further oblations so
far as that particular variety of fish was concerned. All fishermen,
from Hawaii to Niihau, observed this custom religiously. When the
fishermen caught a large supply, whether by the net, hook, or shell,
but one of a kind, as just stated, was reserved as an offering to
Ku-ula; the remainder was then free to the people.



