PELE AND THE DELUGE



All volcanic phenomena are associated in Hawaiian legendary lore
with the goddess Pele; and it is a somewhat curious fact that to
the same celebrated personage is also attributed a great flood that
occurred in ancient times. The legends of this flood are various,
but mainly connected with the doings of Pele in this part of the
Pacific Ocean. The story runs thus:

Kahinalii was the mother of Pele; Kanehoalani was her father; and
her two brothers were Kamohoalii and Kahuilaokalani. Pele was born
in the land of Hapakuela, a far-distant land at the edge of the sky,
toward the southwest. There she lived with her parents until she was
grown up, when she married Wahialoa; and to these were born a daughter
named Laka, and a son named Menehune. But after a time Pele's husband,
Wahialoa, was enticed away from her by Pele-kumulani. The deserted
Pele, being much displeased and troubled in mind on account of her
husband, started on her travels in search of him, and came in the
direction of the Hawaiian Islands. Now, at that time these islands were
a vast waste. There was no sea, nor was there any fresh water. When
Pele set out on her journey, her parents gave her the sea to go with
her and bear her canoes onward. So she sailed forward, flood-borne by
the sea, until she reached the land of Pakuela, and thence onward to
the land of Kanaloa. From her head she poured forth the sea as she
went, and her brothers composed the celebrated ancient mele:


    O the sea, the great sea!
    Forth bursts the sea:
    Behold, it bursts on Kanaloa!


But the waters of the sea continued to rise until only the highest
points of the great mountains, Haleakala, Maunakea, and Maunaloa,
were visible; all else was covered. Afterward the sea receded until it
reached its present level. This event is called the _Kai a Kahinalii_
(Sea of Kahinalii), because it was from Kahinalii, her mother, that
Pele received the gift of the sea, and she herself only brought it
to Hawaii.

And from that time to this, Pele and all her family forsook their
former land of Hapakuela and have dwelt in Hawaii-nei, Pele coming
first and the rest following at a later time.

On her first arrival at Hawaii-nei, Pele dwelt on the island of
Kauai. From there she went to Kalaupapa,  on the island of
Molokai, and dwelt in the crater of Kauhako at that place; thence
she departed to Puulaina,  near Lahainaluna, where she dug out
that crater. Afterward she moved still further to Haleakala, where
she stayed until she hollowed out that great crater; and finally she
settled at Kilauea, on the island of Hawaii, where she has remained
ever since. 



