THE MOUNTAIN GHOST OF THE VIVANNA


About six miles from Graun, above the Endkopf, in the dominions of the
Frauenpleiss, which ancient legends report as the residence of several
fairies, lies the Grauner-Alp, which is also called the Vivanna, and
which belongs to the parish of Graun. Jacob Wolf, a huntsman of Graun,
ordinarily called "Kob," started one evening, towards the close of the
autumn, on a hunting excursion, and climbed up the Vivanna, intending
there to pass the night, so that he might be ready to follow the game
at an early hour on the following morning. He entered the hut which
stands upon the Alp, and after having laid down upon a bundle of dry
grass for his night's rest, he heard the door slowly open, and a little
old shrunken woman entered, whose attire was very like that of a
Sennin, and who seemed to be quite at home there. She lighted a fire,
took cream and flour from a little hole in the wall, and set to work to
make cakes. As soon as she had finished them, she called out, "Now we
are going to eat, and the one down yonder on the grass must be of the
party too."

The huntsman was quite frightened and dared not move, but as the little
woman called out a second time with her shrill voice, which sounded
almost like a command, he picked up his courage, and approached the
spot where the old hag was standing. But, oh, terror! at that moment,
in the midst of a most fearful noise, there all at once entered through
the door a whole tribe of spitting, growling, and miauling cats, pigs
and bucks, besides every description of other wild beasts.

The huntsman sprang quickly back into his corner, seized his rifle,
which he had fortunately charged with a crossed bullet, and fired right
into the middle of the devil's army, which was entirely dispersed in
one moment. No more was either to be seen of the old hag, and her cakes
stood burning before the fire, and smelling of all sorts of fearful
abominations. The huntsman fled from the spot as quickly as ever he
could, and rushed down into the valley, giving up all idea of his
hunting excursion. But in the morning he found out that, in his hasty
retreat, he had left his hunting-sack behind; and so he set off in
broad daylight, accompanied by another man, to the scene of his fearful
adventure, where they found the sack, with all its contents, bitten and
torn to pieces. When recounting this story, Kob always used to say,
"The hell company would have served me the same trick, had I not run
off as quickly as I did."




