THE WITCHES OF G'STOAG


Not many years ago a very rough mountain lane led from Tarenz to Imst,
which was called the G'stoag; the post-road now runs over this spot,
and still bears the same name.

The tailor, Anton Gurschler, of Strad, once returned home from
Grieseck, near Tarenz, where he had been to visit his sweetheart. It
was getting on for the ghost hour, and as he arrived near the smith's
shop, called Hoada-Schmiede, near G'stoag, he ran up against a little
chapel, which is consecrated to the holy Vitus, and, having hurt
himself in the violence of the shock, he was very angry, and began to
swear, for he wanted to know who had pushed him so savagely. At that
moment a carriage with lights drove up, and in it were sitting some
women, whom the tailor immediately recognized perfectly well. They
stopped the carriage, alighted, and offered to dance with him, and
turned him round and round, without his being able to resist them.
Then, as they released him, one of them whispered in his ear, "If you
say one word about this, you had better look out for yourself;" and
then they drove off like a flash of lightning. The tailor was stupefied
with amazement, and, in his anger, he recounted to his friends at home
all that had befallen him, in which, however, he did very wrong, for he
grew thin and ill, and went out at last like the spark of a candle.

To another man, a shoemaker of Tarenz, whose name was Jennewein
Lambach, happened the following circumstance:--He was on his way to
the castle of Starkenberg, close by his village, and on passing by the
church, he neither stopped a moment, nor crossed himself, as it is the
custom in the country to do. It was yet dark, for the shoemaker had got
up earlier than he was aware of; all at once he heard the sounds of
magnificent music, to which he listened for a long time with delighted
ears, and then, to his astonishment, he heard the church clock strike
midnight. He shuddered with fright, for he knew that something must
be wrong, and hurried on as fast as his legs would carry him to
Starkenberg, where he was engaged to work; but as there he could find
no peace of mind, on account of his strange accident, he returned home
again in the afternoon. While he was sitting drinking a glass of wine
with the innkeeper Marrand, of Tarenz, a woman of the village entered
the room, and said to him mockingly, "The music last night must have
pleased you very much, for you listened like a stupid." The shoemaker
was struck dumb and could not reply, for it came to his mind that what
he had heard in the preceding night had been hags' music, and that
that very same woman had been amongst the number of the witches. From
that time he shunned the creature as much as possible, but never told
any one what had happened to him on that eventful evening. He then
bought himself an alarm clock, which he set up close to his bed, so
that he never went again too early to his work, and thus by his silence
he no doubt escaped the dreadful fate of the poor tailor.




