THE NINE-PIN GAME OF MARGARETHA MAULTASCH


In the ruins of the castle of Maultasch are also said to lie a set
of golden nine-pins which appear above the ground and blossom every
hundred years. This set of nine-pins belonged to Margaretha Maultasch,
whose gamekeeper "Georg" stole and buried it when his mistress ceded
the Tyrol to Austria, at Botzen, in 1363. Two days after he had
buried it he was struck by an apoplectic fit and died, and nobody
knew anything of the treasure. Since that time he is compelled in
expiation of his crime to wander about in the castle in the form of a
hideous ghost and guard the hidden treasure, and at midnight he sets
up the nine-pins while sighing, and throws the golden ball against the
large castle gate, which then flies open with a fearful noise. Then
appear all the old counts of the Tyrol and Goerz, some of them with
crowns on their heads, followed by Margaretha Maultasch bearing an
enormously massive necklace of pure gold, and the richest diamonds.
They then begin to play, and the unhappy spirit of Georg is obliged to
set up the nine-pins, but the ball always bounds against his feet so
painfully that his cries very often are heard over Botzen and as far as
Sigmundskron.

Only he who succeeds in digging up the treasure will be the means of
redeeming Georg; but as it is most difficult to find the proper way and
right moment, it has almost become an impossibility.

It is not long since that, in the favourable hour, an egg-woman went
up the way which leads to the castle. The poor soul of Georg took the
egg basket off her head, and put it down close to the tower on the very
spot where the nine-pins lay buried. All at once there was nothing in
the basket but ten black coals instead of eggs. "Throw your rosary
quickly upon them," said the ghost; but unfortunately the woman had no
rosary with her, and so the happy hour passed by again without being
taken advantage of. The ten coals which were to be changed into the
nine-pins and ball, became again ordinary eggs, and only in another
hundred years will this fortunate hour return again.

The ghost climbed up the highest tower rock, crying and sighing his
ordinary lamentations:--

  "He who will redeem me
   From the power of the Evil One,
   Must in the castle's grounds
   Find nine-pins and ball
   Which I stole from the Princess,
   Which I hid from the Princess."




