THE ROSE GARDEN OF KING LAURIN


The beautiful and charming surroundings of the village of Algund and
the castle of Tirol, which stands above it, are still called the "Rose
Garden of King Laurin."

Laurin was the name of a King of the dwarfs; he was old and wise, as
well as mild and kind, and he had a daughter, who was as amiable
and beautiful as a fairy, or "Salige." This lovely Princess wished
to have a garden, and begged her father to give her some ground in
the light of the sun, for the King lived in a crystal castle, deep in
the interior of the mountain, which crowns the old castle of Tirol.
The good father granted his daughter's wish, who now set to work to
exterminate all weeds and evil plants from the plain which her father
had given her, and planted it with all sorts of rose-trees. In this
manner her Rosen-Garten became so beautiful, that up to the present day
its aspect renders the weary traveller happy, and causes him to forget
for the time all pains and griefs, should he have any. So that every
one might enjoy the beauties of her garden, she would not have walls,
but surrounded it with gold tissue ribbons.

When and how this peaceful and joyous reign came to an end, the legend
does not say; but the neighbourhood still remains a "Gottesgarten" (or
paradise), although King Laurin and his beautiful daughter are no more
to be seen; only the indisputable fact of their former existence lives
fresh and green in the memory of all inhabitants of the surrounding
country. Close to the village of Tirol, a dwarf is said to be still
residing, whose comic name is Burzinigala, or Burzinigele. Another
resides upon the mountain called Mutkopf, behind the same village,
who chants in moonlight nights the following song to his native
meadows:--"I am so grey, I am so old, that I remember thee three times
as meadow-land, and three times as forest."

Some people say that King Laurin on leaving his castle went to fight
against giants and dwarfs in the country from Tirol's Rosengarten,
down to the charming Lago del Gardo, and towards Verona, where he was
ultimately baptized, and became a Christian.




