THE TREASURES


Treasure! This ideal of earthly happiness constantly occupies the mind
of the greatest part of the inhabitants of the Tyrol; and many are the
men who, once wealthy and rich, now live on the alms of other people,
on account of their passion for treasure-seeking. Over this hopeless
infatuation they neglected their domestic occupation, and all at once,
almost without knowing it, stood on the verge of beggary, at which they
were just as much surprised as at having been unable to discover the
envied object of their search.

There are treasures in all parts of the country, on the mountains, in
the valleys, under rocks and trees, in the lakes, in the cellars, even
beneath the hearths, and behind the walls. The ruins of once powerful
strongholds generally conceal treasure in different forms, and there
is not one ruin in the whole Tyrol that possesses not its treasure
tradition.

Those treasures blossom from time to time, especially on the eve of
St. John the Baptist's Day. Near Axams, in the middle mountains, above
Innsbruck, on the spot called Zum Knappenloch, a treasure blossoms even
in the broad daylight.

The blooming light of these treasures is described to be blue, like the
flame of spirits of wine, or green, like the light of glow-worms, and
also yellowish-green, like that of phosphorus.

The preceding legends already contain several examples of these
treasure-blossoms, and it would be impossible to relate them all, for
their number would fill a volume. But not very long ago a fact took
place on the post-route from Imst to Landeck, close by the hamlet of
Starkenbach, after which it would be utterly impossible to make the
inhabitants of the surrounding country believe that the treasures do
not blossom.

On this spot several people had noticed, at different times, a green
light, which lasted from two to five minutes; but when they approached,
it dissolved into mist and disappeared.

Some men of Starkenbach happened to be at work on the very same spot,
on the 10th of October, 1854, under the supervision of the road-maker,
Tschoder, when one of the men, whose name is Rundl, pulled up a piece
of turf, and how joyfully surprised was he when some two hundred silver
coins lay at his feet, most of them well-preserved Roman coins of
the times of the Emperors, and bearing the inscriptions of Antonius
Pius, Septimus Severus, Marcus Aurelius, Geta, Caracalla, Maximinus
Augustus; others referred to the Empresses, and bore the inscriptions
of Faustina Augusta, Julia Augusta. The inscriptions on the reverse of
the coins are almost every one of them different, and relate to notable
events of the Roman dynasty in the country, thus, Marti Victori,
Fortunae Reduci, Felicitas, Providentia, Venus Genetrix, and many of
them relate to Juno. The coins are all of the same size, and five of
them go to an ounce.

"Such treasures," declare the simple-minded Tyrolians, "are lying in
thousands all over the country, if it were only possible to lay hands
upon them, as on those Roman coins."




