THE HEXELER


In the village of Hall, in the valley of the Inn, close to Innsbruck,
lived a man who was a peasant doctor, cattle doctor, and fisherman, in
one person; he was also a noted witch-finder, and, as such, held in
terrible dread by all those who had "red eyes." His name was Kolb, but
he was generally called the "Hexeler" (hag hunter), or "Hexenkolb."

One day Kolb was engaged fishing in the lake, called Achenthaler-See,
when suddenly thunderclouds as black as ink collected over his head,
and on a sign which he made with his hand, a weather hag fell down
into the water. The hag seized the side of Kolb's little boat, who,
however, beat the rudder down upon her hands, with the intention of
drowning her, but she implored him to save her, promising that she
would renounce her witchcraft. "As to me," said Kolb, "I will save you
if you will give up your wicked trade; but you must hand over to me
your sorcery book, so that I shall know all your hellish artifices,
and be able to discover their antidotes." After a long dispute, during
which the hag was nearly drowned, she gave him a book, in which her
most secret charms were written down.

After that incident, Kolb became one of the first "Wonder Doctors"
in the Tyrol. When he was asked to cure somebody, the sufferer was
compelled to come to him during the night, and it was only on special
occasions that he consented to visit the house of the sick. When he
was called to the assistance of a bewitched person, he made exactly
at midnight the smoke of five different sorts of herbs, and, while
they were burning, the bewitched was gently beaten with a martyr-thorn
birch, which had also to be cut during the same night, and through
which means, at each stripe that was given, the hag who had bewitched
the person received the most terrible blow, so that the blood flowed at
each stroke. Kolb went on beating in this way, until the hag appeared
and took off the charm. But, during the operation, no one was allowed
to speak, and the necromancer alone treated with the witch. If any one
had spoken but one word, the Hexeler's power would have gone for that
night, and all his work would have been useless.




