THE UNHOLDENHOF


In the days of Maximilian the First, Emperor of Germany, there was a
forester attached to the Court, who was a real "Unhold" (or monster),
of almost supernatural bodily strength, and so much so that he was
generally regarded as a giant. After the Emperor's death, the forester
left the Court with his only son, who was in every degree the image of
his father, and went into the parish of Kreith, in which, since that
time, fourteen peasants have built their farms, which, for the most
part, are all situated on the Middle Mountain, above the rivers Sill
and Rutz, between meadows, uplands, and forests. At the bottom of the
valley the whirr of a "Saege," i.e. a saw-mill, is constantly to be
heard, which stands on the bridge over the Klausbach, over which the
roads lead on into the Stubeithal.

There a beautiful spring, well protected by a statue of the holy
Nepomuk, offers refreshment and rest to the tired traveller, and about
half a mile further on, the road divides into two, and the left-hand
branch leads off into a charming mountain-path, on each side of which
lies a magnificent forest of Alpine firs and pines, and after a quarter
of an hour's ascent, one arrives at a rich and thriving farm, which
comprises in its possessions an ancient chapel; but with all this it
bears a very bad name, and is called the "Unholdenhof" (or monster
farm).

It was on this self-same spot that the forester and his son took up
their abode, and they became the dread and abomination of the whole
surrounding country, for they practised, partly openly and partly in
secret, the most manifold iniquities, so that their nature and bearing
grew into something demoniacal. As quarrellers very strong, and as
enemies dreadfully revengeful, they showed their diabolical nature by
the most inhuman deeds, which brought down injury, not only on those
against whom their wrath was directed, but also upon their families for
centuries. In the heights of the mountains they turned the beds of the
torrents, and devastated by this means the most flourishing tracts of
land; on other places, the Unholde set on fire whole mountain-forests,
to allow free room for the avalanches to rush down and overwhelm the
farms. Through certain means they cut holes and fissures in the rocks,
in which, during the summer, quantities of water collected, which froze
in the winter, and then in the spring the thawing ice split the rocks,
which then rolled down into the valleys, destroying everything before
them. Some of these terrific rock-falls prepared by them ensued only
some forty or fifty years afterwards.

Through these iniquitous deeds, they gained the dreaded name of
Unholde, which has descended to their abode to the present day; but
at last Heaven's vengeance reached them. An earthquake threw the
forester's house into ruins, wild mountain torrents tore over it, and
thunderbolts set all around it in a blaze; and by fire and water, with
which they had sinned, father and son perished, and were condemned to
everlasting torments. Up to the present day, they are to be seen at
nightfall on the mountain, in the form of two fiery boars.

A better generation has built a new farm upon the same spot on which
the old Unholdenhof used to stand; but, against their wish and will,
the new house has kept up the old name, which sometimes changes into
that of Starkenhof, because the wicked foresters were also called "die
Starken" (the strong ones).

The old peasant Hohlenbauer, who still is living in the village
of Mutters, can recount to the traveller a great deal about the
Unholdenhof; and, among other things, he would tell him how one day the
forester, in his stupidity, sold valuable parchments to a child's-drum
maker of Innsbruck, who, as stupid as he of whom he had bought them,
erased the writing with a stone, and covered little drums with the
priceless documents.




