THE PIOUS HERDSMAN


About three miles above Uderns, in the valley of the Ziller, lies the
Asten or Voralp, also called the Stuben, upon which a poor spirit used
to wander, seeking its redemption.

The proprietor of the Asten was unable to find any one who would
undertake to guard his cattle on the mountain, for every one was afraid
of the ghost. At last, a poor brave boy offered himself for this
purpose, and was of course gladly accepted.

One day as he was driving his cows upon the mountain, he saw a tall
dark figure wandering about a few steps from the door of his little
hut, which is called in the Tyrolian dialect the schlamm. The boy
instantly spoke to the apparition, and asked whether he could not do
anything to release him from his pain, to which the ghost answered,
yes, he could, if during a whole year, without omitting one single day,
he would devoutly repeat a rosary, and promise during that time never
to swear or do a bad action, and always to say the rosary at the same
hour every day.

The honest son of the Alps conscientiously fulfilled his duty for a
very long time, until one day in the summer a pretty little village
girl came up the mountain and begged the cowherd to stand godfather to
her sister's child, for they were very poor, and knew no one who would
be likely to accept the office but him. The good herd promised directly
that he would; and when the day of the baptism arrived, he well fed his
cows and then set off down the mountain to Uderns. After the ceremony
was over, he had intended to return immediately up the Asten, as it is
the custom in the Tyrol to feed the cattle four times a day. But the
mother of the child implored him to remain a little longer with them,
and so one thing and another prevented him from starting so soon as
he had wished. It happened therefore that he remained in the village
until evening had set in, for they insisted on serving him with good
liqueurs, which to the poor cowherd were a great treat, as it is very
seldom one of his position has the chance of tasting such a thing.
At last he set off on his return, and as he climbed the mountain he
remembered that he had forgotten the hour of his prayers, and was so
grieved at this omission, that he cried bitterly, and repeated aloud
the neglected rosary as he went along. Then the idea struck him that
he would also offer up his baptismal work for the benefit of the poor
spirit.

When he arrived at his hut he proceeded immediately to the stables,
thinking to himself, "how hungry the poor cattle must be," but great
was his astonishment when he saw that the best food had been placed
before them, and that everything was in the most perfect order; but
far greater was his surprise when after he had retired to rest, the
poor spirit appeared before him, clad in snow-white garments, and told
him that he was now redeemed, and that which had been principally
instrumental in his redemption, was the offering which the good
cowherd had made of the baptism of the child. After this the spirit
disappeared, and has never been seen again. Since this fact became
known, it has been, and still is the custom in all parts of the Tyrol
for godfathers and godmothers to make an offering of the baptismal rite
on behalf of the poor souls in purgatory.




