THE TEUFELSPLATTE NEAR GALTHUeR


At the head of the valley of Patznau stands the Galthuer, a lofty
mountain, which rises also from the Hinder-Patznau, over 5000 feet
above the level of the sea, at the junction of the valleys Montafon
and Underengadein. Southwards from this mountain runs the Iammthal, or
Iamm valley, about six miles long, and bordered by seven Alps; towards
the Iamm-Ferner, stands a colossal ice peak, which stretches its frozen
arms down towards the valleys of Patznau, Montafon, and Engadein.

In the Iammthal lie beautiful rich meadows, together with the
Teufelsplatte, a rock which has been very much spoken of. An iron ring
of 500 pounds is fastened into this rock, and it is said that the devil
himself screwed it in its present place.

The legend goes that two peasants of Galthuer had quarrelled several
long years about a neighbouring meadow, and at last they agreed that
the parish itself should decide to which of them the meadow really
belonged, for the vast parish meadows surrounded the spot in question.
So it was decided that the two peasants who disputed the ownership of
the meadow should throw a heavy iron ring, and he who threw the ring
furthest should have the meadow, besides all the ground over which he
could pitch the ring to gain this object, and the parish judge added,
"If either of you fail in throwing the ring over the meadow, its
boundaries shall remain wherever the ring shall fall, and all that is
lost shall be added to the parish grounds; but also, wherever you can
pitch the ring into the parish grounds, so far it shall be yours."

Three days afterwards the trial took place. One of the two competitors
was a man who knew more than other people; he was able to summon the
devil himself; and as with his assistance he hoped to gain all the
meadows in the valley, he made a compact with the Evil One. On the day
of the trial all the villagers collected on the mountain, where they
found an iron ring quite ready, but of 500 pounds in weight. "Ha!"
thought the parish council, "all the better, for neither of them can
throw this ring one foot from the spot, and the whole meadow will be
ours."

Now one of the combatants tried to throw the ring, but he could not
even lift it from the ground. Then came the other, who, aided by the
devil's own power, lifted the massive iron as easily as though it had
been a finger-ring, and lightly tossed it over the valley, as far as
the opposite rock, into which it became so deeply imbedded that only a
very little is to be seen of the iron.

The parish councillors scratched their ears in astonishment, while
the victorious peasant who had thus gained all the extensive and rich
parish meadows, laughed and danced with joy. But on the other side,
close against the rock, a terrible voice was heard laughing too; and
that laughter was anything but of this world, for it was the dread
demon himself who laughed.

Shortly afterwards the rich peasant became more and more dejected;
every one avoided him, and he avoided every one, and each succeeding
year found him in a worse and worse state of mind. Once a terrible
storm broke out during the night; black clouds collected above the
magnificent farm, which the peasant had built on his evilly-gained
grounds, and at last a thunderbolt struck the farm and set it ablaze.
When the neighbours ran to assist, they saw a gigantic demon fly out of
the smoking flaming ruins, holding the rich peasant by the neck, and
dragging him, body and soul, to perdition.

On the following morning all the meadows lay covered with stones and
rocks, which during the storm had rolled down from the surrounding
mountains, and, as a memorial, the ring still remains in the rock,
which since that time has borne the name of the Teufelsplatte.




