THE FAIRY OF THE SONNENWENDJOCH


At the foot of the gigantic mountain peak on which stands the
Sonnenwendjoch, a chalk Alp, over 8000 feet high, stand the hamlets of
Brixlegg, Mehrn, and Zimmermoos, upon a lovely plain, from which the
Achen rushes down into the valley, and works the lead, silver, and tin
foundries, which are the most important of the whole Tyrol. On that
spot a fairy used to reside.

Close by lies the little town of Rattenberg, above which used to stand
a magnificent stronghold, of which there are now but a few picturesque
ruins to be seen. One day the young Baron of the little castle of Mehrn
went hunting upon the charming green mountain side, and as in the
pursuit of his game he had approached the Sonnenwendjoch, he caught
sight of the fairy of the mountain. To see her and fall deeply in love
with her was the work of a moment, and the fairy also returned his
affection, for the handsome young Baron pleased her. The fairy, who was
a guardian of Alpine animals, ordered the youth never to pursue one of
them again if he wished her to take any notice of him. Then she led
him into her dominions, in which there were endless magnificent things
to be seen--gardens of never-fading flowers; deep, clear fountains;
meadows, upon which animals were peacefully browsing; and grottoes
supported by crystal columns, and whose roofs and walls were like
mirrors. They then became engaged, and the Baron received from the
fairy a ring as gage of her favour

After that he often went out under the pretence of hunting, but never
brought home any game; at which every one was astonished, because he
was noted as a good shot and clever huntsman, and had already killed
many bears and boars with his dagger alone. Every one was surprised,
too, to see that he avoided all the surrounding castles, and seemed to
have made up his mind to remain unmarried. Meanwhile, it happened that
in the castle of Rattenberg a wedding took place, to which the lord
also invited his friend the Baron of Mehrn; and, as it was impossible
for him to decline this invitation, he attended the wedding to his
great grief, for there he met a young lady of Innsbruck who entangled
him in her toils, and pleased him so much that he gave her the fairy's
ring which she had noticed glittering on his finger.

Overcome by shame and remorse at his infidelity, he went on the
following morning to the Sonnenwendjoch, where he saw a white doe
bounding before him. At that sight the old love of hunting awoke
in him, and he pursued the animal to a well-known spot, where, by
knocking with his ring, a door in the rock sprang open which led to
the entrance of the fairy's empire. There the youth stood rooted to
the ground with terror, for he had not the ring; and suddenly the fairy
herself appeared before him, dignified and haughty, not in anger, but
in deep grief. She held the ring in her delicate hand, and said in a
low sad voice: "You are unfaithful. You have sworn always to think
but of me; never to give my ring to another; never to pursue one of
my animals, and you have thrice broken your oath. Farewell!"--and in
saying so she disappeared from before his eyes.

The Baron had scarcely left the spot when a huge rock rolled down the
mountain with the noise of thunder and covered a large portion of the
valley with its debris. After that the young man became sad and
dejected and left the country, and people say that he went to the Holy
Land, from which he has never returned.




