A TYROLIAN FORESTER'S LEGEND


One day a poor woman of Lengenfeld, in the Oetz valley in the Tyrol,
went up the mountains to meet her husband, who was guarding a flock of
goats there. On her way she passed by a chapel into which she entered,
and while she was praying a Laemmer vulture swooped down and carried off
in his claws her little son, who was amusing himself outside on the
moss. But Heaven ordained that the vulture should settle with his prey
on a peak which was quite close to the goat-herd, who frightened him
off with stones, and so, without knowing it, he became the preserver of
his own child, whom he had not seen since the spring. Now it happened
that three good fairies who resided in the neighbourhood of the
Oetz-Thal, beneath an enormous mountain peak called the Morin, had been
invisibly active in the saving of the goat-herd's boy.

The boy grew up and always bore in his mind an attraction to the
highest peaks of the mountains; he became a hardy Alpine climber and
clever mountain shot, and as such a secret impulse ever pushed him
to the heights above Morin, for there--so said the legend--was the
Paradise of animals; there were herds of gazelles and stone-bucks, and
no huntsman had ever succeeded in approaching them. But the fool-hardy
boy wished to try his luck, and commenced his wanderings, which ended
by his getting lost, and being in danger of his life. One day he didn't
know where he was, and from the ice-covered peak which reaches into the
clouds over ten thousand feet high, he slipped down upon a green Alp
which he had been unable to see from above, and in that fall he lost
his senses.

As he came again to himself he was lying on a beautiful bed in the
crystal cave of the three fairies, who had saved him for the second
time. They stood round him shining with heavenly benevolence, and love,
and their look awakened in him the sweetest sensations. He remained now
a well-cared-for guest of the fairies, was allowed to look at their
beautiful abode, their gardens, and their pets; he was told that his
amiable hostesses were the protecting genii of all Alpine animals, and
they made him promise never to kill or to hurt one of those innocent
creatures,--no gazelle, no Alpine hare, no snow-hen, not even a weasel.
He was allowed to remain with them three days, and had permission to
worship and adore them. But then he was obliged to promise three things
faithfully and on his soul's salvation, if ever he wanted to return to
them, or, in case he never cared to do so, if ever he wished to live
happily down in the valley. Firstly, he was bound to observe a silence
as deep as the grave that he had ever seen the three fairies or been in
their presence; secondly, they made him swear the promise which he had
already given, never to do any harm to any Alpine animal; and thirdly,
never to let human eye see the way which they were going to show him,
and through which he might be the more easily able to return to their
abode. A fourth promise they left to his honour, without binding him
down by oath or vow, and that was to preserve the love which he had
shown to them, and never to have anything to do in any way with any
other girl. Then, after a tender parting, the son of the Alps was
taken into a steep mountain gully which led down to the valley of the
rushing Achen, which tears along under bowers of Alpine rose-bushes.
After these injunctions, the fairies told him that on every full-moon
night he was allowed to pay them a visit of three days' duration, and
that he had only to enter through that gully, and give below a certain
sign with which they acquainted him.

The boy returned home completely altered; it seemed as though he was
dreaming, and soon enough from every one he gained the name of the
'dreamer;' for henceforth he never took an Alpine stock in his hand,
never went hunting, and never to a village dance, but every full-moon
night he stole quietly to the chasm in the rock, deep beneath the
Morin, entered into the interior of the mountain, and was for three
days happy with the fairies, to whose wondrous songs he listened
entranced. At home his form shrank, he became pale and emaciated, and
it was in vain that his parents and friends pressed him to tell what
was the matter with him. "Nothing at all," he always answered to these
questions; "I am as happy as I can be."

As his father and mother had become aware of his secret strolls on
the full-moon nights, they followed him once quietly, and close at the
entrance of the chasm his ear was struck by his mother's voice, who
called his name, and at the same moment the rocks shut together before
his eyes, and the mountains crashed down with the noise of thunder, so
that rocks fell down upon rocks. The poor boy's happiness was gone for
ever. Troubled and abstracted, he returned to his native village; he
cared neither for his mother's tears nor his father's reproaches, and
remained apathetic and indifferent to everything; and so he faded away
until autumn arrived, until the herds were driven down into the winter
stables of the village, and the beautiful summer life of the mountain
world died and was covered with snow.

Then one day two friends of the goat-herd arrived, and talked of a
hunting excursion which they intended to make on the top of the Morin;
and then for the first time again the eyes of the pale young Alpine
hunter became bright, the irresistible love of hunting awakened again
in him,--perhaps, too, there was some greater attraction. He longed to
penetrate once more into the dominion of the fairies be it even at the
risk of his life. As to life, he no longer valued it, and death was a
liberation.

The infatuated youth prepared his hunting things, borrowed an Alpine
stock, for his own had been left behind broken in his fall from the
peak of the Morin, and then he joined the hunting excursion which
started in early morning. First he walked with them, then he hurried
before higher and higher, as though he was attracted by the most
irresistible power. His heart grew light as he ascended, for too long
the heavy air of the narrow valley had oppressed him. He climbed as
quickly as though he had eaten arsenic, that fearful poison which
many an Alpine climber takes in the smallest quantities to make
himself lighter, and at last he caught sight of a sentry gazelle,
which whistled and disappeared behind the peak upon which it had been
standing. The young Alpine hunter climbed to the top of the peak, from
whence he saw down below him a little green spot, upon which were
browsing, though far beyond his reach, a large herd of gazelles. Only
one of them came within range, and this one he pursued pitilessly,
until the poor animal in her anxiety and terror was unable to proceed
further, and stopped on the edge of a precipice, which the huntsman
in his excitement had never noticed. He levelled his rifle--the
plaintive cry of a female voice resounded in his ears, but he paid no
heed to it,--he took deadly aim and fired. Lo! at that moment he was
surrounded by a halo of brightness, and in the midst of that brilliant
light stood the gazelle unhurt, and before her floated the three
fairies in dazzling splendour, but with severe and angry countenances.
They approached him, but on seeing their faces without one smile or
look of love upon them, the boy was seized with a deep horror. He
staggered,--one step more, and backwards he fell down the precipice a
thousand feet deep; and from the edge, where in falling his feet had
stood, pieces of stone rolled down, and a tremendous wall of rock tore
down after him with a fearful roar, and buried him for ever beneath its
debris.

There still stands the rock, which is pointed out, even to this day as
'The Huntsman's Grave.'




