THE SALVE-TOAD


It is a well-known fact in the Tyrol that the Jordan chapel, which
stands on the mountain, called Salve, and which is dedicated to St.
John the Baptist, has been founded by a widow, who, out of maternal
weakness, had been the cause of encouraging her only son in all sorts
of wickedness, which he carried so far as to become the chief of a band
of robbers and cut-throats. Too late, the infatuated woman discovered
the crime of which she had been guilty, and, in deep repentance, sought
her son, and, after following him for many days, found him at last on
the top of the Hohe Salve.

She then tried to persuade him to give himself up to justice, but he
was obdurate; until one night, in a dream, the ghastly head of St.
John the Baptist appeared to him; after which he gave himself up to
the authorities, and his head, with those of all his companions, was
chopped off. The guilty mother buried all the heads together, on the
top of the mountain, sold all she had, and devoted it to the erection
of the chapel, which is still standing there.

Other people recount this legend in a different manner; they say that
the brigand had vowed to make a pilgrimage upon the Hohe Salve, if
Heaven would only assist him to rid himself of his evil companions,
and help him to lead again a good life. But, after having obtained the
assistance of Heaven, the brigand forgot his vow, and for that reason
he was compelled after his death to crawl up to the top of the mountain
in the form of a toad, and to enter into the chapel. After a long
time, the poor toad succeeded in climbing the mountain, but at the
entrance of the chapel there were always people who pushed and kicked
him away. At length, however, he succeeded in entering the chapel,
and crawled three times round the altar, after which he was instantly
changed into the form of a handsome man, who addressed the people who
were praying there, telling them of his brigand life and hard penance,
and then he suddenly disappeared from their eyes.




