CHING YUH AND KYAIN OO THE TRIALS OF TWO HEAVENLY LOVERS




Ching Yuh and Kyain Oo were stars attendant upon the Sun. They fell
madly in love with each other, and, obtaining the royal permission,
they were married. It was to them a most happy union, and having
reached the consummation of their joys they lived only for one another,
and sought only each other's company. They were continually in each
other's embrace, and as the honey-moon bade fair to continue during
the rest of their lives, rendering them unfit for the discharge
of their duties, their master decided to punish them. He therefore
banished them, one to the farthest edge of the eastern heavens, the
other to the extreme opposite side of the great river that divides
the heavenly plains (the Milky Way).

They were sent so far away that it required full six months to make the
journey, or a whole year to go and come. As they must be at their post
at the annual inspection, they therefore could only hope to journey
back and forth for the scant comfort of spending one short night in
each other's company. Even should they violate their orders and risk
punishment by returning sooner, they could only see each other from
either bank of the broad river, which they could only hope to cross
at the season when the great bridge is completed by the crows, who
carry the materials for its construction upon their heads, as any
one may know, who cares to notice, how bald and worn are the heads
of the crows during the seventh moon.

Naturally this fond couple are always heart-broken and discouraged at
being so soon compelled to part after such a brief but long-deferred
meeting, and 'tis not strange that their grief should manifest itself
in weeping tears so copious that the whole earth beneath is deluged
with rains.

This sad meeting occurs on the night of the seventh day of the seventh
moon, unless prevented by some untoward circumstance, in which case
the usual rainy season is withheld, and the parched earth then unites
in lamentation with the fond lovers, whose increased trials so sadden
their hearts that even the fountain of tears refuses to flow for
their relief.

You Tah Jung was a very wise official, and a remarkably good man. He
could ill endure the corrupt practices of many of his associate
officials, and becoming dissatisfied with life at court, he sought
and obtained permission to retire from official life and go to the
country. His marriage had fortunately been a happy one, hence he
was the more content with the somewhat solitary life he now began
to lead. His wife was peculiarly gifted, and they were in perfect
sympathy with each other, so that they longed not for the society
of others. They had one desire, however, that was ever before them
and that could not be laid aside. They had no children; not even a
daughter had been granted them.

As You Tah Jung superintended the cultivation of his estate, he felt
that he would be wholly happy and content were it not for the lack of
offspring. He gave himself up to the fascinating pastime of fishing,
and took great delight in spending the most of his time in the
fields listening to the birds and absorbing wisdom, with peace and
contentment, from nature. As spring brought the mating and budding
season, however, he again got to brooding over his unfortunate
condition. For as he was the last of an illustrious family, the
line seemed like to cease with his childless life. He knew of the
displeasure his ancestors would experience, and that he would be unable
to face them in paradise; while he would leave no one to bow before
his grave and make offerings to his spirit. Again he bemoaned their
condition with his poor wife, who begged him to avail himself of his
prerogative and remove their reproach by marrying another wife. This
he stoutly refused to do, as he would not risk ruining his now pleasant
home by bringing another wife and the usual discord into it.

Instead of estranging them, their misfortune seemed but to bind this
pair the closer together. They were very devout people, and they prayed
to heaven continually for a son. One night the wife fell asleep while
praying, and dreamed a remarkable dream. She fancied that she saw
a commotion in the vicinity of the North Star, and presently a most
beautiful boy came down to her, riding upon a wonderful fan made of
white feathers. The boy came direct to her and made a low obeisance,
upon which she asked him who he was and where he came from. He said:
"I am the attendant of the great North Star, and because of a mistake
I fell into he banished me to earth for a term of years, telling me
to come to you and bring this fan, which will eventually be the means
of saving your life and my own."

In the intensity of her joy she awoke, and found to her infinite
sorrow that the beautiful vision was but a dream. She cherished it in
her mind, however, and was transported with joy when a beautiful boy
came to them with the succeeding spring-tide. The beauty of the child
was the comment of the neighborhood, and every one loved him. As he
grew older it was noticed that the graces of his mind were even more
remarkable than those of his person.

The next ten years were simply one unending period of blissful
contentment in the happy country home. They called the boy Pang Noo
(his family name being You, made him You Pang Noo). His mother taught
him his early lessons herself, but by the expiration of his first ten
years he had grown far beyond her powers, and his brilliant mind even
taxed his intelligent father in his attempts to keep pace with him.

About this time they learned of a wonderful teacher, a Mr. Nam Juh
Oon, whose ability was of great repute. It was decided that the boy
should be sent to this man to school, and great was the agitation
and sorrow at home at thought of the separation. He was made ready,
however, and with the benediction of father and caresses of mother,
he started for his new teacher, bearing with him a wonderful feather
fan which his father had given him, and which had descended from his
great-grandfather. This he was to guard with especial care, as, since
his mother's remarkable dream, preceding his birth, it was believed
that this old family relic, which bore such a likeness to the fan of
the dream, was to prove a talisman to him, and by it evil was to be
warded off, and good brought down upon him.

Strange as it may seem, events very similar in nature to those just
narrated were taking place in a neighboring district, where lived
another exemplary man named Cho Sung Noo. He was a man of great
rank, but was not in active service at present, simply because of
ill-health induced by constant brooding over his ill-fortune; for,
like You Tah Jung, he was the last of an illustrious family, and had
no offspring. He was so happily married, furthermore, that he had
never taken a second wife, and would not do so.

About the time of the events just related concerning the You family,
the wife of Cho, who had never neglected bowing to heaven and
requesting a child, dreamed. She had gone to a hill-side apart from
the house, and sitting in the moonlight on a clean plat of ground,
free from the litter of the domestic animals, she was gazing into the
heavens, hoping to witness the meeting of Ching Yuh and Kyain Oo, and
feeling sad at the thought of their fabled tribulations. While thus
engaged she fell asleep, and while sleeping dreamed that the four
winds were bearing to her a beautiful litter, supported upon five
rich, soft clouds. In the chair reclined a beautiful little girl,
far lovelier than any being she had ever dreamed of before, and the
like of which is never seen in real life. The chair itself was made
of gold and jade. As the procession drew nearer the dreamer exclaimed:
"Who are you, my beautiful child?"

"Oh," replied the child, "I am glad you think me beautiful, for then,
may be, you will let me stay with you."

"I think I should like to have you very much, but you haven't yet
answered my question."

"Well," she said, "I was an attendant upon the Queen of Heaven, but
I have been very bad, though I meant no wrong, and I am banished to
earth for a season; won't you let me live with you, please?"

"I shall be delighted, my child, for we have no children. But what
did you do that the stars should banish you from their midst?"

"Well, I will tell you," she answered. "You see, when the annual
union of Ching Yuh and Kyain Oo takes place, I hear them mourning
because they can only see each other once a year, while mortal pairs
have each other's company constantly. They never consider that while
mortals have but eighty years of life at most, their lives are without
limit, and they, therefore, have each other to a greater extent than
do the mortals, whom they selfishly envy. In a spirit of mischief
I determined to teach this unhappy couple a lesson; consequently,
on the last seventh moon, seventh day, when the bridge was about
completed and ready for the eager pair to cross heaven's river
to each others' embrace, I drove the crows away, and ruined their
bridge before they could reach each other. I did it for mischief,
'tis true, and did not count on the drought that would occur, but
for my misconduct and the consequent suffering entailed on mortals,
I am banished, and I trust you will take and care for me, kind lady."

When she had finished speaking, the winds began to blow around
as though in preparation for departure with the chair, minus its
occupant. Then the woman awoke and found it but a dream, though
the winds were, indeed, blowing about her so as to cause her to
feel quite chilly. The dream left a pleasant impression, and when,
to their intense joy, a daughter was really born to them, the fond
parents could scarcely be blamed for associating her somewhat with
the vision of the ravishing dream.

The child was a marvel of beauty, and her development was rapid and
perfect. The neighbors were so charmed with her, that some of them
seemed to think she was really supernatural, and she was popularly
known as the "divine maiden," before her first ten years were finished.

It was about the time of her tenth birthday that little Uhn Hah had
the interesting encounter upon which her whole future was to hinge.

It happened in this way: One day she was riding along on her nurses'
back, on her way to visit her grandmother. Coming to a nice shady spot
they sat down by the road-side to rest. While they were sitting there,
along came Pang Noo on his way to school. As Uhn Hah was still but a
girl she was not veiled, and the lad was confronted with her matchless
beauty, which seemed to intoxicate him. He could not pass by, neither
could he find words to utter, but at last he bethought him of an
expedient. Seeing some oranges in her lap, he stepped up and spoke
politely to the nurse, saying, "I am You Pang Noo, a lad on my way
to school, and I am very thirsty, won't you ask your little girl to
let me have one of her oranges?" Uhn Hah was likewise smitten with
the charms of the beautiful lad, and in her confusion she gave him
two oranges. Pang Noo gallantly said, "I wish to give you something
in return for your kindness, and if you will allow me I will write
your name on this fan and present it to you."

Having obtained the name and permission, he wrote: "No girl was ever
possessed of such incomparable graces as the beautiful Uhn Hah. I
now betroth myself to her, and vow never to marry other so long as I
live." He handed her the fan, and feasting his eyes on her beauty,
they separated. The fan being closed, no one read the characters,
and Uhn Hah carefully put it away for safe keeping without examining
it sufficiently close to discover the written sentiment.

Pang Noo went to school and worked steadily for three years. He learned
amazingly fast, and did far more in three years than the brightest
pupils usually do in ten. His noted teacher soon found that the boy
could even lead him, and it became evident that further stay at the
school was unnecessary. The boy also was very anxious to go and see his
parents. At last he bade his teacher good-by, to the sorrow of both,
for their companionship had been very pleasant and profitable, and
they had more than the usual attachment of teacher and pupil for each
other. Pang Noo and his attendant journeyed leisurely to their home,
where they were received with the greatest delight. His mother had not
seen her son during his schooling, and even her fond pride was hardly
prepared for the great improvement the boy had made, both in body and
mind, since last she saw him. The father eventually asked to see the
ancestral fan he had given him, and the boy had to confess that he had
it not, giving as an excuse that he had lost it on the road. His father
could not conceal his anger, and for some time their pleasure was
marred by this unfortunate circumstance. Such a youth and an only son
could not long remain unforgiven, however, and soon all was forgotten,
and he enjoyed the fullest love of his parents and admiration of his
friends as he quietly pursued his studies and recreation.

In this way he came down to his sixteenth year, the pride of the
neighborhood. His quiet was remarked, but no one knew the secret
cause, and how much of his apparent studious attention was devoted
to the charming little maiden image that was framed in his mental
vision. About this time a very great official from the neighborhood
called upon his father, and after the usual formalities, announced that
he had heard of the remarkable son You Tah Jung was the father of, and
he had come to consult upon the advisability of uniting their families,
as he himself had been blessed with a daughter who was beautiful and
accomplished. You Tah Jung was delighted at the prospect of making
such a fine alliance for his son, and gave his immediate consent,
but to his dismay, his son objected so strenuously and withal so
honorably that the proposition had to be declined as graciously as the
rather awkward circumstances would allow. Both men being sensible,
however, they but admired the boy the more, for the clever rascal
had begged his father to postpone all matrimonial matters, as far as
he was concerned, till he had been able to make a name for himself,
and had secured rank, that he might merit such attention.

Pang Noo was soon to have an opportunity to distinguish himself. A
great quaga (civil-service examination) was to be held at the capital,
and Pang Noo announced his intention of entering the lists and
competing for civil rank. His father was glad, and in due time started
him off in proper style. The examination was held in a great enclosure
at the rear of the palace, where the King and his counsellors sat in
a pavilion upon a raised stage of masonry. The hundreds of men and
youths from all parts of the country were seated upon the ground under
large umbrellas. Pang Noo was given a subject, and soon finished his
essay, after which he folded it up carefully and tossed the manuscript
over a wall into an enclosure, where it was received and delivered
to the board of examiners. These gentlemen, as well as His Majesty,
were at once struck with the rare merit of the production, and made
instant inquiry concerning the writer. Of course he was successful,
and a herald soon announced that Pang, the son of You Tah Jung had
taken the highest honors. He was summoned before the King, who was
pleased with the young man's brightness and wisdom. In addition to
his own rank, his father was made governor of a province, and made
haste to come to court and thank his sovereign for the double honor,
and to congratulate his son.

Pang was given permission to go and bow at the tomb of his ancestors,
in grateful acknowledgment for Heaven's blessings. Having done which,
he went to pay his respects to his mother, who fairly worshipped her
son now, if she had not done so before. During his absence the King
had authorized the board of appointments to give him the high rank of
Ussa, for, though he was young, His Majesty thought one so wise and
quick, well fitted to travel in disguise and spy out the acts of evil
officials, learn the condition of the people, and bring the corrupt
and usurous to punishment. Pang Noo was amazed at his success, yet
the position just suited him, for, aside from a desire to better the
condition of his fellow-men, he felt that in this position he would
be apt to learn the whereabouts of his lady-love, whose beautiful
vision was ever before him. Donning a suitable disguise, therefore,
he set out upon the business at hand with a light heart.

Uhn Hah during all this time had been progressing in a quiet way as a
girl should, but she also was quite the wonder of her neighborhood. All
this time she had had many, if not constant, dreams of the handsome
youth she had met by the roadside. She had lived over the incident
time and again, and many a time did she take down and gaze upon the
beautiful fan, which, however, opened and closed in such a manner
that, ordinarily, the characters were concealed. At last, however,
she discovered them, and great was her surprise and delight at the
message. She dwelt on it much, and finally concluded it was a heaven
arranged union, and as the lad had pledged his faith to her, she vowed
she would be his, or never marry at all. This thought she nourished,
longing to see Pang Noo, and wondering how she should ever find him,
till she began to regard herself as really the wife of her lover.

About this time one of His Majesty's greatest generals, who had
a reputation for bravery and cruelty as well, came to stop at his
country holding near by, and hearing of the remarkable girl, daughter
of the retired, but very honorable, brother official, he made a call
at the house of Mr. Cho, and explained that he was willing to betroth
his son to Cho's daughter. The matter was considered at length,
and Cho gave his willing consent. Upon the departure of the General,
the father went to acquaint his daughter with her good fortune. Upon
hearing it, she seemed struck dumb, and then began to weep and moan,
as though some great calamity had befallen her. She could say nothing,
nor bear to hear any more said of the matter. She could neither eat nor
sleep, and the roses fled from her tear-bedewed cheeks. Her parents
were dismayed, but wisely abstained from troubling her. Her mother,
however, betimes lovingly coaxed her daughter to confide in her,
but it was long before the girl could bring herself to disclose a
secret so peculiar and apparently so unwomanly. The mother prevailed
at last, and the whole story of the early infatuation eventually came
forth. "He has pledged himself to me," she said, "he recognized me at
sight as his heaven-sent bride, and I have pledged myself to him. I
cannot marry another, and, should I never find him on earth, this
fan shall be my husband till death liberates my spirit to join his
in the skies." She enumerated his great charms of manner and person,
and begged her mother not to press this other marriage upon her,
but rather let her die, insisting, however, that should she die her
mother must tell Pang Noo how true she had been to him.

The father was in a great dilemma. "Why did you not tell this to your
mother before? Here the General has done me the honor to ask that our
families be united, and I have consented. Now I must decline, and his
anger will be so great that he will ruin me at the Capitol. And then,
after all, this is but an absurd piece of childish foolishness. Your
fine young man, had he half the graces you give him, would have been
betrothed long before this."

"No! No!" she exclaimed, "he has pledged himself, and I know he is
even now coming to me. He will not marry another, nor can I. Would you
ask one woman to marry two men? Yet that is what you ask in this, for
I am already the wife of Pang Noo in my heart. Kill me, if you will,
but spare me this, I beg and entreat," and she writhed about on her
cot, crying till the mat was saturated with her tears.

The parents loved her too well to withstand her pleadings, and
resigning themselves to the inevitable persecution that must result,
they dispatched a letter to the General declining his kind offer,
in as unobjectionable a manner as possible. It had the result that
was feared. The General, in a towering rage, sent soldiers to arrest
Mr. Cho, but before he could go further, a messenger arrived from
Seoul with despatches summoning him to the Capitol immediately, as
a rebellion had broken out on the borders. Before leaving, however,
he instructed the local magistrate to imprison the man and not
release him till he consented to the marriage. It chanced that the
magistrate was an honest man and knew the General to be a very cruel,
relentless warrior. He therefore listened to Cho's story, and believed
the strange case. Furthermore, his love for the girl softened his
heart, and he bade them to collect what they could and go to another
province to live. Cho did so, with deep gratitude to the magistrate,
while the latter wrote to the General that the prisoner had avoided
arrest and fled to unknown parts, taking his family with him.

Poor Pang Noo did his inspection work with a heavy heart as time wore
on, and the personal object of his search was not attained. In the
course of his travels he finally came to his uncle, the magistrate
who had dismissed the Cho family. The uncle welcomed his popular
nephew right warmly, but questioned him much as to the cause of his
poor health and haggard looks, which so ill-became a man of his youth
and prospects. At last the kind old man secured the secret with its
whole story, and then it was his turn to be sad, for had he not just
sent away the very person the Ussa so much desired to see?

When Pang learned this his malady increased, and he declared he could
do no more active service till this matter was cleared up. Consequently
he sent a despatch to court begging to be released, as he was in
such poor health he could not properly discharge his arduous duties
longer. His request was granted, and he journeyed to Seoul, hoping to
find some trace of her who more and more seemed to absorb his every
thought and ambition.

In the meantime the banished family, heart-sick and travel-worn,
had settled temporarily in a distant hamlet, where the worn and
discouraged parents were taken sick. Uhn Hah did all she could for
them, but in spite of care and attention, in spite of prayers and
tears, they passed on to join their ancestors. The poor girl beat her
breast and tore her hair in an agony of despair. Alone in a strange
country, with no money and no one to shield and support her, it seemed
that she too must, perforce, give up. But her old nurse urged her to
cheer up, and suggested their donning male attire, in which disguise
they could safely journey to another place unmolested.

The idea seemed a good one, and it was adopted. They allowed their
hair to fall down the back in a long braid, after the fashion of the
unmarried men, and, putting on men's clothes, they had no trouble
in passing unnoticed along the roads. After having gone but a short
distance they found themselves near the capital of the province--the
home of the Governor. While sitting under some trees by the roadside
the Governor's procession passed by. The couple arose respectfully,
but the Governor (it was Pang Noo's father), espying the peculiar
feather fan, ordered one of the runners to seize the women and bring
them along. It was done; and when they were arrived at the official
yamen, he questioned the supposed man as to where he had secured
that peculiar fan. "It is a family relic," replied Uhn Hah, to the
intense amazement of the Governor, who pronounced the statement false,
as the fan was a peculiar feature in his own family, and must be one
that had descended from his own ancestors and been found or stolen
by the present possessor.

However, the Governor offered to pay a good round sum for the fan. But
Uhn Hah declared she would die rather than part with it, and the two
women in disguise were locked up in prison. A man of clever speech
was sent to interview them, and he offered them a considerable sum
for the fan, which the servant urged Uhn Hah to take, as they were
sadly in want. After the man had departed in disgust, however, the
girl upbraided her old nurse roundly for forsaking her in her time
of trial. "My parents are dead," she said. "All I have to represent
my husband is this fan that I carry in my bosom. Would you rob me
of this? Never speak so again if you wish to retain my love"; and,
weeping, she fell into the servant's arms, where, exhausted and
overwrought nature asserting itself, sleep closed her eyes.

While sleeping she dreamed of a wonderful palace on high, where she
saw a company of women, who pointed her to the blood-red reeds that
lined the river bank below, explaining that their tears had turned
to blood during their long search for their lovers, and dropping on
the reeds they were dyed blood-red. One of them prophesied, however,
that Uhn Hah was to be given superhuman strength and powers, and
that she would soon succeed in finding her lover, who was now a high
official, and so true to her that he was sick because he could not
find her. She awakened far more refreshed by the dream than by the
nap, and was soon delighted by being dismissed. The Governor's steward
took pity on the handsome "boy," and gave him a parting gift of wine
and food to carry with them, as well as some cash to help them on,
and, bidding him good-by, the women announced their intention of
travelling to a distant province.

Meanwhile Pang Noo had reached home, and was weary both in body
and mind. The King offered him service at court, but he asked to
be excused, and seemed to wish to hide himself and avoid meeting
people. His father marvelled much at this, and again urged the young
man to marry; but this seemed only to aggravate his complaint. His
uncle happened to come to his father's gubernatorial seat on a
business errand, and in pity for the young man, explained the cause
of the trouble to the father. He saw it all, and recalled the strange
beauty of the lad who had risked his life for the possession of the
fan, and as the uncle told the story of her excellent parentage, and
the trouble and death that resulted from the refusal to marry, he saw
through the whole strange train of circumstances, and marvelled that
heaven should have selected such an exemplary maiden for his son. And
then, as he realized how nearly he had come to punishing her severely,
for her persistent refusal to surrender the fan, and that, whereas,
he might have retained her and united her to his son, he had sent her
away unattended to wander alone; he heaped blame upon the son in no
stinted manner for his lack of confidence in not telling his father
his troubles. The attendants were carefully questioned concerning the
conduct of the strange couple while in custody at the governor's yamen,
and as to the probable direction they took in departure. The steward
alone could give information. He was well rewarded for having shown
them kindness, but his information cast a gloom upon the trio, for he
said they had started for the district where civil war was in progress.

"You unnatural son," groaned the father. "What have you done? You
secretly pledge yourself to this noble girl, and then, by your foolish
silence, twice allow her to escape, while you came near being the
cause of her death at the very hands of your father; and even now by
your foolishness she is journeying to certain death. Oh, my son! we
have not seen the last of this rash conduct; this noble woman's blood
will be upon our hands, and you will bring your poor father to ruin
and shame. Up! Stop your lovesick idling, and do something. Ask His
Majesty, with my consent, for military duty; go to the seat of war,
and there find your wife or your honor."

The father's advice was just what was needed; the son could not, of
necessity, disobey, nor did he wish to; but arming himself with the
courage of a desperate resolve to save his sweetheart, whom he fancied
already in danger from the rebels, he hurried to Seoul, and surprising
his sovereign by his strange and ardent desire for military service,
easily secured the favor, for the general in command was the same who
had wished to marry his son to Uhn Hah; he was also an enemy to Pang
Noo's father, and would like to see the only son of his enemy killed.

With apparently strange haste the expedition was started off, and no
time was lost on the long, hard march. Arriving near the seat of war,
the road led by a mountain, where the black weather-worn stone was as
bare as a wall, sloping down to the road. Fearing lest he was going
to his death, the young commander had some characters cut high on
the face of the rock, which read:

"Standing at the gate of war, I, You Pang Noo, humbly bow to Heaven's
decree. Is it victory, or is it death? Heaven alone knows the issue. My
only remaining desire is to behold the face of my lady Cho Gah." He put
this inscription in this conspicuous place, with the hope that if she
were in the district she would see it, and not only know he was true
to her, but also that she might be able to ascertain his whereabouts
and come to him. He met the rebels, and fought with a will, bringing
victory to the royal arms. But soon their provisions gave out, and,
though daily despatches arrived, no rations were sent in answer to
their constant demands. The soldiers sickened and died. Many more,
driven mad by hardship and starvation, buried their troubles deep in
the silent river, which their loyal spears had stained crimson with
their enemies blood.

You Pang Noo was about to retire against orders, when the rebels,
emboldened by the weak condition of their adversaries, came in force,
conquered and slew the remnant, and would have slain the commander
but for the counsel of two of their number, who urged that he be
imprisoned and held for ransom.

Again fate had interfered to further separate the lovers, for, instead
of continuing her journey, Uhn Hah had received news that induced her
to start for Seoul. While resting, on one occasion, they had some
conversation with a passer-by. He was from the capital, and stated
that he had gone there from a place near Uhn Hah's childhood home as an
attendant of the Ussa You Pang Noo, who had taken sick at his uncle's,
the magistrate, and had gone to Seoul, where he was excused from ussa
duty and offered service at court. He knew not of the recent changes,
but told his eager listener all he knew of Pang Noo's family.

The weary, foot-sore girl and her companion turned their faces toward
the capital, hoping at last to be rewarded by finding the object of
their search. That evening darkness overtook them before they had
found shelter, and spying a light through the trees, they sought it
out, and found a little hut occupied by an old man. He was reading
a book, but laid it aside as they answered his invitation to enter,
given in response to their knock. The usual salutations were exchanged,
but instead of asking who the visitors were, where they lived, etc.,
etc., the old man called her by her true name, Cho Nang Jah. "I am
not a Nang Jah" (a female appellation), she exclaimed; "I am a man!"

"Oh! I know you, laughed the old man; "you are Cho Nang Jah in very
truth, and you are seeking your future husband in this disguise. But
you are perfectly safe here."

"Ask me no questions," said he, as she was about to utter some
surprised inquiries. "I have been waiting for you and expecting
you. You are soon to do great things, for which I will prepare
you. Never mind your hunger, but devour this pill; it will give you
superhuman strength and courage." He gave her a pill of great size,
which she ate, and then fell asleep on the floor. The old man went
away, and soon the tired servant slept also. When they awoke it was
bright morning, and the birds were singing in the trees above them,
which were their only shelter, for the hut of the previous evening
had disappeared entirely, as had also the old man. Concluding that
the old man must be some heaven-sent messenger, she devoutly bowed
herself in grateful acknowledgment of the gracious manifestation.

Journeying on, they soon came to a wayside inn kept by an old farmer,
and here they procured food. While they were eating, a blind man
was prophesying for the people. When he came to Uhn Hah he said:
"This is a woman in disguise; she is seeking for her husband, who is
fighting the rebels, and searching for her. He is now nearly dead;
but he will not die, for she will rescue him." On hearing this she was
delighted and sad at the same time, and explaining some of her history
to the master of the house, he took her in with the women and treated
her kindly. She was very anxious to be about her work, however, since
heaven had apparently so clearly pointed it out to her, and, bidding
the simple but kind friends good-by, she started for the seat of war,
where she arrived after a long, tedious, but uneventful tramp.

Almost the first thing she saw was the inscription on the rocks left
by the very one she sought, and she cried bitterly at the thought
that maybe she was too late. The servant cheered her up, however,
by reciting the blind man's prophecy, and they went on their way till
they came to a miserable little inn, where they secured lodging. After
being there some time, Uhn Hah noticed that the innkeeper's wife was
very sad, and continually in tears. She therefore questioned her
as to the cause of her grief. "I am mourning over the fate of the
poor starved soldiers, killed by the neglect of some one at Seoul,
and for the brave young officer, You Pang Noo, whom the rebels
have carried away captive." At this Uhn Hah fainted away, and the
nurse made such explanation as she could. Restoratives were applied,
and she slowly recovered, when, on further questioning, it was found
that the inn-people were slaves of You Pang Noo, and had followed him
thus far. It was also learned that the absence of stores was generally
believed to be due to the corrupt general-in-chief, who not only hated
his gallant young officer, but was unwilling to let him achieve glory,
so long as he could prevent it.

After consultation, and learning further of the matter, Uhn Hah
wrote a letter explaining the condition of affairs, and dispatched
it to Pang Noo's father by the innkeeper. The Governor was not at
his country place, and the messenger had to go to Seoul, where,
to his horror, he found that his old master was in prison, sent
there by the influence of the corrupt General, his enemy, because
his son had been accused of being a traitor, giving over the royal
troops to the rebels, and escaping with them himself. The innkeeper,
however, secured access to the prison, and delivered the letter to
the unfortunate parent. Of course, nothing could be done, and again
he blamed his son for his stupid secrecy in concealing his troubles
from his father, and thus bringing ruin upon the family and injury
to the young lady. However, he wrote a letter to the good uncle,
relating the facts, and requesting him to find the girl, place her
in his home, and care for her as tenderly as possible. He could do
nothing more. The innkeeper delivered this letter to the uncle, and
was then instructed to carry a litter and attendants to his home and
bring back the young lady, attired in suitable garments. He did so
as speedily as possible, though the journey was a long and tedious one.

Once installed in a comfortable home poor Uhn Hah became more and
more lonely. She seemed to have nothing now to hope for, and the
stagnation of idleness was more than she could endure. She fancied her
lover in prison, and suffering, while she was in the midst of comfort
and luxury. She could not endure the thought, and prevailed upon her
benefactor to convey to His Majesty a petition praying that she be
given a body of soldiers and be allowed to go and punish the rebels,
reclaim the territory, and liberate her husband. The King marvelled
much at such a request, coming from one of her retiring, seclusive sex,
and upon the advice of the wicked General, who was still in command,
the petition was not granted. Still she persisted, and found other
ways of reaching the throne, till the King, out of curiosity to see
such a brave and loyal woman, bade her come before him.

When she entered the royal presence her beauty and dignity of carriage
at once won attention and respectful admiration, so that her request
was about to be granted, when the General suggested, as a last resort,
that she first give some evidence of her strength and prowess before
the national military reputation be entrusted to her keeping. It
seemed a wise thought, and the King asked her what she could do to
show that she was warranted in heading such a perilous expedition. She
breathed a prayer to her departed parents for help, and remembering
the strange promise of the old man who gave her the pill, she felt
that she could do almost any thing, and seizing a large weather-worn
stone that stood in an ornamental rock basin in the court, she threw
it over the enclosing wall as easily as two men would have lifted it
from the ground. Then, taking the General's sword, she began slowly
to manipulate it, increasing gradually, as though in keeping with
hidden music, till the movement became so rapid that the sword seemed
like one continuous ring of burning steel--now in the air, now about
her own person, and, again, menacingly near the wicked General, who
cowered in abject terror before the remarkable sight. His Majesty was
completely captivated, and himself gave the orders for her expedition,
raising her to relative rank, and giving her the choicest battalion
of troops. In her own peculiarly dignified way she expressed her
gratitude, and, bowing to the ground, went forth to execute her
sovereign's commands, and attain her heart's desire.

Again donning male attire, she completed her preparations, and departed
with eager delight to accomplish her mission. The troops having
obtained an inkling of the strange character and almost supernatural
power of their handsome, dashing leader, were filled with courage
and eager for the fray. But to the dismay of all, they had no sooner
arrived at the rebel infested country than severe rains began to fall,
making it impossible to accomplish any thing. This was explained,
however, by the spirits of the departed soldiers, who appeared to the
officers in dreams, and announced that as they had been sacrificed
by the cruel General, who had intentionally withheld their rations,
they would allow no success to the royal arms till their death was
avenged by his death. This was dispatched to court, and believed by
His Majesty, who had heard similar reports, oft repeated. He therefore
confined the General in prison, and sent his son (the one who wished
to marry Uhn Hah) to the front to be executed.

He was slain and his blood scattered to the winds. A feast was prepared
for the spirits of the departed soldiers, and this sacrifice having
been made, the storm ceased, the sun shone, and the royal troops
met and completely vanquished the rebels, restoring peace to the
troubled districts, but not obtaining the real object of the leaders'
search. After much questioning, among the captives, a man was found
who knew all about You Pang Noo, and where he was secreted. Upon the
promise of pardon, he conducted a party who rescued the captive and
brought him before their commander. Of course for a time the lovers
could not recognize each other after the years that had elapsed since
their first chance meeting.

You Pang Noo was given command and Uhn Hah modestly retired, adopted
her proper dress, and was borne back to Seoul in a litter. The whole
country rang with their praises. You Pang Noo was appointed governor
of a province, and the father was reinstated in office, while the
General who had caused the trouble was ignominiously put to death,
and his whole family and his estates were confiscated.

As Cho Uhn Hah had no parents, His Majesty determined that she should
have royal patronage, and decreed that their wedding should take place
in the great hall where the members of the royal family are united in
marriage. This was done with all the pomp and circumstance of a royal
wedding, and no official stood so high in the estimation of the King,
as the valiant, true-hearted You, while the virtues of his spouse
were the subject of songs and ballads, and she was extolled as the
model for the women of the country.








