LEGEND OF THE ACCURSED BELL


This story, Senor--it is about the accursed bell that once was the
clock-bell of the Palace--has so many beginnings that the only way
really to get at the bones of it would be for a number of people, all
talking at once, to tell the different first parts of it at the same
time.

For, you see, the curse that was upon this bell--that caused it to be
brought to trial before the Consejo of the Inquisition, and by the
Consejo to be condemned to have its wicked tongue torn out and to be
banished from Spain to this country--was made up of several curses
which had been in use in other ways elsewhere previously: so that one
beginning is with the Moor, and another with Don Gil de Marcadante,
and another with the devil-forged armor, and still another with the
loosing of all the curses from the cross (wherein for some hundreds of
years they were imprisoned) and the fusing of them into the one great
curse wherewith this unfortunate bell was afflicted--which happened
when that holy emblem was refounded, and with the metal of it this
bell was made.

Concerning the Moor, Senor, I can give you very little information.
All that I know about him is that he had the bad name of Muslef; and
that he was killed--as he deserved to be killed, being an Infidel--by
a Christian knight; and that this knight cut his head off and brought
it home with him as an agreeable memento of the occasion, and was very
pleased with what he had done. Unfortunately, this knight also brought
home with him the Moor's armor--which was of bronze, and so curiously
and so beautifully wrought that it evidently had been forged by
devils, and which was farther charged with devilishness because it had
been worn by an Infidel; and then, still more unfortunately, he
neglected to have the armor purified by causing the devils to be
exorcised out of it by a Christian priest. Therefore, of course, the
devils remained in the armor--ready to make trouble whenever they got
the chance.

How Don Gil de Marcadante came to be the owner of that accursed
devil-possessed armor, Senor, I never have heard mentioned. Perhaps he
bought it because it happened to fit him; and, certainly--he being a
most unusually sinful young gentleman--the curse that was upon it and
the devils which were a part of it fitted him to a hair.

This Don Gil was a student of law in Toledo; but his studies were the
very last things to which he turned his attention, and the life that
he led was the shame of his respectable brother and his excellent
mother's despair. Habitually, he broke every law of the Decalogue, and
so brazenly that all the city rang with the stories of his evil doings
and his crimes. Moreover, he was of a blusterous nature and a born
brawler: ready at the slightest contradiction to burst forth with such
a torrent of blasphemies and imprecations that his mouth seemed to be
a den of snakes and toads and scorpions; and ever quick to snatch his
sword out and to get on in a hurry from words to blows. As his nearest
approach to good nature was after he had killed some one in a quarrel
of his own making, and as even at those favorable times his temper was
of a brittleness, he was not looked upon as an agreeable companion
and had few friends.

This Don Gil had most intimate relations with the devil, as was proved
in various ways. Thus, a wound that he received in one of his duels
instantly closed and healed itself; on a night of impenetrable
darkness, as he went about his evil doings, he was seen to draw apart
the heavy gratings of a window as though the thick iron bars had been
silken threads; and a stone that he cast at a man in one of his
rages--mercifully not hitting him--remained burning hot in the place
where it had fallen for several days. Moreover, it was known generally
that in the night time, in a very secret and hidden part of his
dwelling, he gave himself up to hideous and most horrible sacrileges
in which his master the devil had always a part. And so these
facts--and others of a like nature--coming to the knowledge of the
Holy Office, it was perceived that he was a sorcerer. Therefore he was
marched off--wearing his devil-forged armor, to which fresh curses had
come with his use of it--to a cell in the Inquisition; and to make
sure of holding him fast until the next auto de fe came round, when he
was to be burned properly and regularly, he was bound with a great
chain, and the chain was secured firmly to a strong staple in the cell
wall.

But the devil, Senor, sometimes saves his own. On a morning, the
jailer went as usual to Don Gil's cell with the bread and the water
for him; and when he had opened the cell door he saw, as he believed,
Don Gil in his armor waiting as usual for his bread and his water: but
in a moment he perceived that what he saw was not Don Gil in his
armor, but only the accursed armor standing upright full of emptiness;
and that the staple was torn out; and that the great chain was broken;
and that Don Gil was gone! And then--so much to the horror of the
jailer that he immediately went mad of it--the empty armor began
slowly to walk up and down the cell!

After that time Don Gil never was seen, nor was he heard of, again on
earth; and so on earth, when the time came for burning him at the auto
de fe, he had to be burned in effigy. However--as there could be no
doubt about the place to which the devil had taken him--everybody was
well satisfied that he got his proper personal burning elsewhere.

Then it was, Senor, that the Holy Office most wisely ordered that that
devil-possessed and doubly accursed armor should be melted, and
refounded into a cross: knowing that the sanctity of that blessed
emblem would quiet the curses and would hold the devils still and
fast. Therefore that order was executed; and the wisdom of it--which
some had questioned, on the ground that devils and curses were
unsuitable material to make a cross of--was apparent as soon as the
bronze turned fluid in the furnace: because there came from the fiery
seething midst of it--to the dazed terror of the workmen--shouts of
devil-laughter, and imprecations horrible to listen to, and frightful
blasphemies; and to these succeeded, as the metal was being poured
into the mould, a wild outburst of defiant remonstrance; and then all
this demoniac fury died away--as the metal hardened and became fixed
as a cross--at first into half-choked cries of agony, and then into
confused lamentations, and at the last into little whimpering moans.
Thus the devils and the curses were disposed of: and then the
cross--holding them imprisoned in its holy substance--was set up in a
little townlet not far from Madrid in which just then a cross
happened to be wanted; and there it remained usefully for some
hundreds of years.

At the end of that period--by which time everybody was dead who knew
what was inside of it--the cross was asked for by the Prior of a
little convent in that townlet near Madrid, who desired it that he
might have it refounded into a bell; and as the Prior was a worthy
person, and as he really needed a bell, his request was granted. So
they made out of the cross a very beautiful bell: having on one side
of it the two-headed eagle; and having on the other side of it a
calvario; and having at the top of it, for its hanging, two imperial
lions supporting a cross-bar in the shape of a crown. Then it was hung
in the tower of the little convent; and the Prior, and all the
Brothers with him, were very much pleased. But that worthy Prior, and
those equally worthy Brothers, were not pleased for long, Senor:
because the curses and the devils all were loose again--and their
chance to do new wickednesses had come!

On a night of blackness, without any warning whatever, the whole of
the townlet was awakened by the prodigious clangor of a bell
furiously ringing. In an instant--seeking the cause of this
disturbance--everybody came out into the night's blackness: the Senor
Cura, the Senor Alcalde, the alguaciles, the Prior, the Brothers, all
the townsfolk to the very last one. And when they had looked about
them they found that the cause of the disturbance was the new bell of
the convent: which was ringing with such an excessive violence that
the night's blackness was corrupted with its noise.

Terror was upon everyone; and greater terror was upon every one when
it was found out that the door of the bell-tower was locked, and that
the bell was ringing of its lone self: because the bad fact then
became evident that only devils could have the matter in hand. The
Senor Alcalde alone--being a very valiant gentleman, and not much
believing in devils--was not satisfied with that finding. Therefore
the Senor Alcalde caused the door to be unlocked and, carrying a torch
with him, entered the bell-tower; and there he found the bell-rope
crazily flying up and down as though a dozen men were pulling it, and
nobody was pulling it--which sight somewhat shook his nerves.
However, because of his valorousness, he only stopped to cross
himself; and then he went on bravely up the belfry stair. But what he
saw when he was come into the belfry fairly brought him to a stand.
For there was the bell ringing tempestuously; and never a visible hand
was near it; and the only living thing that he found in the belfry was
a great black cat with its tail bushed out and its fur
bristling--which evil animal for a moment leered at him malignantly,
with its green eyes gleaming in the torch-light, and then sprang
past him and dashed down the stair.

Then the Senor Alcalde, no longer doubting that the bell was being
rung by devils, and himself not knowing how to manage devils, called
down from the belfry to the Senor Cura to come up and take charge of
the matter: whereupon the Senor Cura, holding his courage in both
hands, did come up into the belfry, bringing his hisopo with him, and
fell to sprinkling the bell with holy water--which seemed to him, so
far as he could see his way into that difficult tangle, the best thing
that he could do. But his doing it, of course, was the very worst
thing that he could have done: because, you see, Senor, the devils
were angered beyond all endurance by being scalded with the holy water
(that being the effect that holy water has upon devils) and so only
rang the bell the more furiously in their agony of pain. Then the
Senor Alcalde and the Senor Cura perceived that they could not quiet
the devils, and decided to give up trying to. Therefore they came down
from the belfry together--and they, and everybody with them, went away
through the night's blackness crossing themselves, and were glad to be
safe again in their homes.

The next day the Senor Alcalde made a formal inquest into the whole
matter: citing to appear before him all the townsfolk and all the
Brothers, and questioning them closely every one. And the result of
this inquest was to make certain that the bell-ringer of the convent
had not rung the bell; nor had any other of the Brothers rung it; nor
had any of the townsfolk rung it. Therefore the Senor Alcalde, and
with him the Senor Cura--whose opinion was of importance in such a
matter--decided that the devil had rung it: and their decision was
accepted by everybody, because that was what everybody from the
beginning had believed.

Therefore--because such devilish doings affected the welfare of the
whole kingdom--a formal report of all that had happened was submitted
to the Cortes; and the Cortes, after pondering the report seriously,
perceived that the matter was ecclesiastical and referred it to the
Consejo of the Inquisition; and the members of the Consejo, in due
course, ordered that all the facts should be digested and regularized
and an opinion passed upon them by their Fiscal.

Being a very painstaking person, the Fiscal went at his work with so
great an earnestness that for more than a year he was engaged upon it.
First he read all that he could find to read about bells in all the
Spanish law books, from the _Siete Partidas_ of Alonzo the Wise
downward; then he read all that he could find about bells in such law
books of foreign countries as were accessible to him; then, in the
light of the information so obtained, he digested and regularized the
facts of the case presented for his consideration and applied himself
to writing his opinion upon them; and then, at last, he came before
the Consejo and read to that body his opinion from beginning to end.
Through the whole of a long day the Fiscal read his opinion; and
through the whole of the next day, and the next, and the next; and at
the end of the fourth day he finished the reading of his opinion and
sat down. And the opinion of the Fiscal was that the devil had rung
the bell.

Then the Consejo, after debating for three days upon what had been
read by the Fiscal, gave formal approval to his opinion; and in
conformity with it the Consejo came to these conclusions:

      1. That the ringing of the bell was a matter of no importance
      to good Christians.

      2. That the bell, being possessed of a devil, should have its
      tongue torn out: so that never again should it dare to ring of
      its lone devilish self, to the peril of human souls.

      3. That the bell, being dangerous to good Christians, should
      be banished from the Spanish Kingdom to the Indies, and
      forever should remain tongueless and exiled over seas.

Thereupon, that wise sentence was executed. The devil-possessed bell
was taken down from the belfry of the little convent, and its wicked
tongue was torn out of it; then it was carried shamefully and with
insults to the coast; then it was put on board of one of the ships of
the flota bound for Mexico; and in Mexico, in due course, it arrived.
Being come here, and no orders coming with it regarding its
disposition, it was brought from Vera Cruz to the Capital and was
placed in an odd corner of one of the corridors of the Palace: and
there it remained quietly--everybody being shy of meddling with a bell
that was known to be alive with witchcraft--for some hundreds of
years.

In that same corner it still was, Senor, when the Conde de
Revillagigedo--only a little more than a century ago--became Viceroy;
and as soon as that most energetic gentleman saw it he wanted to know
in a hurry--being indisposed to let anything or anybody rust in
idleness--why a bell that needed only a tongue in it to make it
serviceable was not usefully employed. For some time no one could tell
him anything more about the bell than that there was a curse upon it;
and that answer did not satisfy him, because curses did not count for
much in his very practical mind. In the end a very old clerk in the
Secretariat gave him the bell's true story; and proved the truth of it
by bringing out from deep in the archives an ancient yellowed
parchment: which was precisely the royal order, following the decree
of the Consejo, that the bell should have its tongue torn out, and
forever should remain tongueless and exiled over seas.

With that order before him, even the Conde de Revillagigedo, Senor,
did not venture to have a new tongue put into the bell and to set it
to regular work again; but what he did do came to much the same thing.
At that very time he was engaged in pushing to a brisk completion the
repairs to the Palace--that had gone on for a hundred years
languishingly, following the burning of it in the time of the Viceroy
Don Gaspar de la Cerda--and among his repairings was the replacement
of the Palace clock. Now a clock-bell, Senor, does not need a tongue
in it, being struck with hammers from the outside; and so the Conde,
whose wits were of an alertness, perceived in a moment that by
employing the bell as a clock-bell he could make it useful again
without traversing the king's command. And that was what immediately
he did with it--and that was how the Palace clock came to have foisted
upon it this accursed bell.

But, so far as I have heard, Senor, this bell conducted itself as a
clock-bell with a perfect regularity and propriety: probably because
the devils which were in it had grown too old to be dangerously
hurtful, and because the curse that was upon it had weakened with
time. I myself, as a boy and as a young man, have heard it doing its
duty always punctually; and no doubt it still would be doing its duty
had not the busybodying French seen fit--during the period of the
Intervention, when they meddled with everything--to put another bell
in the place of it and to have it melted down. What was done with the
metal when the bell was melted, Senor, I do not know; but I have been
told by an old founder of my acquaintance that nothing was done with
it: because, as he very positively assured me, when the bell was
melted the metal of it went sour in the furnace and refused to be
recast.

If that is true, Senor, it looks as though all those devils in the
bell--which came to it from the Moor and from the devil-forged armor
and from Don Gil de Marcadante--still had some strength for wickedness
left to them even in their old age.




