LEGEND OF THE CALLE DE LA JOYA


What this street was called, in very old times, Senor, no one knows:
because the dreadful thing that gave to it the name of the Street of
the Jewel happened a long, long while ago. It was before the
Independence. It was while the Viceroys were here who were sent by the
King of Spain.

In those days there lived in this fine house at the corner of the
Calle de Mesones and what since then has been called the Calle de la
Joya--it is at the northwest corner, Senor, and a biscuit-bakery is on
the lower floor--a very rich Spanish merchant: who was named Don
Alonso Fernandez de Bobadilla, and who was a tall and handsome man,
and gentle-mannered, and at times given to fits of rage. He was
married to a very rich and a very beautiful lady, who was named Dona
Ysabel de la Garcide y Tovar; and she was the daughter of the Conde de
Torreleal. This lady was of an ardent and a wilful nature, but Don
Alonso loved her with a sincerity and humored her in all her whims
and wants. When they went abroad together--always in a grand coach,
with servants like flies around them--the whole City stood still and
stared!

Dona Ysabel was not worthy of her husband's love: and so he was told
one day, by whom there was no knowing, in a letter that was thrown
from the street into the room where he was sitting, on the ground
floor. It was his office of affairs, Senor. It is one of the rooms
where the biscuits are baked now. In that letter he was bidden to
watch with care his wife's doings with the Licenciado Don Jose Raul de
Lara, the Fiscal of the Inquisition--who was a forlorn little man
(_hombrecillo_) not at all deserving of any lady's love--and Don
Alonso did watch, and what came of his watching was a very terrible
thing.

He pretended, Senor, that he had an important affair with the Viceroy
that would keep him at the Palace until far into the night; and so
went his way from his home in the early evening--but went no farther
than a dozen paces from his own door. There, in the dark street,
huddled close into a doorway, his cloak around him--it was a night in
winter--he waited in the creeping cold. After a time along came some
one--he did not know who, but it was the Licenciado--and as he drew
near to the house Dona Ysabel came out upon her balcony, and between
them there passed a sign. Then, in a little while, the door of Don
Alonso's house was opened softly and the Licenciado went in; and then,
softly, the door was shut again.

Presently, Don Alonso also went in, holding in his hand his dagger.
What he found--and it made him so angry that he fell into one of his
accustomed fits of rage over it--was the Licenciado putting on the
wrist of his wife a rich golden bracelet. When they saw him, Senor,
their faces at once went white--and their faces remained white always:
because Don Alonso, before the blood could come back again, had killed
the two of them with his dagger--and they were white in death! Then
Don Alonso did what gave to this street the name of the Street of the
Jewel. From Dona Ysabel's wrist he wrenched loose the bracelet, and as
he left the house he pinned it fast with his bloody dagger to the
door.

In that way things were found the next morning by the watch; and the
watch, suspecting that something wrong had happened--because to see a
bracelet and a bloody dagger in such a place was unusual--called the
Alcalde to come and look into the matter; and the Alcalde, coming,
found Dona Ysabel and the Licenciado lying very dead upon the floor.
So the street was called the Calle de la Joya, and that is its name.

Don Alonso, Senor, was worried by what he had done, and became a
Dieguino--it is the strict order of the Franciscans. They go
barefoot--and it was in the convent of the Dieguinos, over there at
the western end of the Alameda, that he ended his days.




