LEGEND OF LA LLORONA


As is generally known, Senor, many bad things are met with by night in
the streets of the City; but this Wailing Woman, La Llorona, is the
very worst of them all. She is worse by far than the vaca de
lumbre--that at midnight comes forth from the potrero of San Pablo and
goes galloping through the streets like a blazing whirlwind, breathing
forth from her nostrils smoke and sparks and flames: because the Fiery
Cow, Senor, while a dangerous animal to look at, really does no harm
whatever--and La Llorona is as harmful as she can be!

Seeing her walking quietly along the quiet street--at the times when
she is not running, and shrieking for her lost children--she seems a
respectable person, only odd looking because of her white petticoat
and the white reboso with which her head is covered, and anybody might
speak to her. But whoever does speak to her, in that very same moment
dies!

The beginning of her was so long ago that no one knows when was the
beginning of her; nor does any one know anything about her at all. But
it is known certainly that at the beginning of her, when she was a
living woman, she committed bad sins. As soon as ever a child was born
to her she would throw it into one of the canals which surround the
City, and so would drown it; and she had a great many children, and
this practice in regard to them she continued for a long time. At last
her conscience began to prick her about what she did with her
children; but whether it was that the priest spoke to her, or that
some of the saints cautioned her in the matter, no one knows. But it
is certain that because of her sinnings she began to go through the
streets in the darkness weeping and wailing. And presently it was said
that from night till morning there was a wailing woman in the streets;
and to see her, being in terror of her, many people went forth at
midnight; but none did see her, because she could be seen only when
the street was deserted and she was alone.

Sometimes she would come to a sleeping watchman, and would waken him
by asking: "What time is it?" And he would see a woman clad in white
standing beside him with her reboso drawn over her face. And he would
answer: "It is twelve hours of the night." And she would say: "At
twelve hours of this day I must be in Guadalajara!"--or it might be in
San Luis Potosi, or in some other far-distant city--and, so speaking,
she would shriek bitterly: "Where shall I find my children?"--and
would vanish instantly and utterly away. And the watchman would feel
as though all his senses had gone from him, and would become as a dead
man. This happened many times to many watchmen, who made report of it
to their officers; but their officers would not believe what they
told. But it happened, on a night, that an officer of the watch was
passing by the lonely street beside the church of Santa Anita. And
there he met with a woman wearing a white reboso and a white
petticoat; and to her he began to make love. He urged her, saying:
"Throw off your reboso that I may see your pretty face!" And suddenly
she uncovered her face--and what he beheld was a bare grinning skull
set fast to the bare bones of a skeleton! And while he looked at her,
being in horror, there came from her fleshless jaws an icy breath; and
the iciness of it froze the very heart's blood in him, and he fell to
the earth heavily in a deathly swoon. When his senses came back to him
he was greatly troubled. In fear he returned to the Diputacion, and
there told what had befallen him. And in a little while his life
forsook him and he died.

What is most wonderful about this Wailing Woman, Senor, is that she is
seen in the same moment by different people in places widely apart:
one seeing her hurrying across the atrium of the Cathedral; another
beside the Arcos de San Cosme; and yet another near the Salto del
Agua, over by the prison of Belen. More than that, in one single night
she will be seen in Monterey and in Oaxaca and in Acapulco--the whole
width and length of the land apart--and whoever speaks with her in
those far cities, as here in Mexico, immediately dies in fright. Also,
she is seen at times in the country. Once some travellers coming along
a lonely road met with her, and asked: "Where go you on this lonely
road?" And for answer she cried: "Where shall I find my children?"
and, shrieking, disappeared. And one of the travellers went mad.
Being come here to the City they told what they had seen; and were
told that this same Wailing Woman had maddened or killed many people
here also.

Because the Wailing Woman is so generally known, Senor, and so greatly
feared, few people now stop her when they meet with her to speak with
her--therefore few now die of her, and that is fortunate. But her loud
keen wailings, and the sound of her running feet, are heard often; and
especially in nights of storm. I myself, Senor, have heard the running
of her feet and her wailings; but I never have seen her. God forbid
that I ever shall!
