LEGEND OF THE CALLE DE LOS PARADOS


Two dead lovers, Senor, stand always in the Calle de los Parados, one
at each end of it; and that is why--because they remain steadfastly on
parade there, though it is not everybody who happens to see their
yellow skeletons on those corners--the street of the Parados is so
named.

As you may suppose, Senor, the lovers now being dry skeletons, what
brought them there happened some time ago. Just when it happened, I do
not know precisely; but it was when an excellent gentleman, who was an
officer in the Royal Mint, lived in the fine house that is in the
middle of the street on the south side of it, and had living with him
a very beautiful daughter whose hair was like spun gold. This
gentleman was named Don Jose de Vallejo y Hermosillo; and his daughter
was named (because her mother was of the noble family of Vezca) Dona
Maria Ysabel de Vallejo y Vezca; and she was of great virtue and
sweetness, and was twenty-two years old.

All the young men of the City sought her in marriage; but there were
two who were more than any of the others in earnest about it. One of
these was Don Francisco Puerto y Solis, a lieutenant of dragoons: who
had to offer her only his good looks--he was a very handsome
gentleman--and the hope of what he might get for himself with his
sword. The other one was the Senor Don Antonio Miguel del Cardonal,
Conde de Valdecebro--who also was a handsome gentleman, and who owned
mills in Puebla of the Angels, and a very great hacienda, and was so
rich that it was the whole business of two old notaries to count his
gold.

And these two posted themselves every day in the street in which was
Dona Maria's home--one at the corner of the Calle del Reloj, the other
at the corner of the Calle de Santa Catarina--that they might look at
her when she came forth from her house; and that she might see them
waiting to get sight of her, and so know that they loved her. It was
the same custom then, Senor, as it is to-day. In that way all of our
polite young men make love.

And just as our young ladies nowadays wait and wait and think and
think before they make their hearts up, so Dona Maria waited and
thought then--and the time slipped on and on, and neither the
Lieutenant nor the Conde knew what was in her mind. Then there
happened, Senor, a very dismal thing. A pestilence fell upon the City,
and of that pestilence Dona Maria sickened and died. But it chanced
that neither of her lovers was on his corner when they took her out
from her house to bury her--you see, Senor, even lovers must eat and
sleep sometimes, and they could not be always on their watch for
her--and in that way it happened that neither of them knew that she
was dead and gone. Therefore they kept on standing on their parade
quite as usual--coming steadfastly to their corners day after day, and
month after month, and year after year. And although, after a while,
they died too, they still stood at their posts--just as though they
and Dona Maria still were alive. And there, on their corners, they
have remained until this very day.

It is told, Senor, that once in broad daylight half the City saw those
honest waiting skeletons. It was on a day when there was a great
festival for the incoming of a new Viceroy, and they were seen by
the crowd that waited in the atrium of the church of Santa Catarina to
see the procession pass. But that was some hundreds of years ago,
Senor. Now, for the most part, it is at night and by moonlight that
they are seen. I have not happened to see them myself--but then I do
not often go that way.




