LEGEND OF THE CALLE DEL PUENTE DEL CUERVO


As you know, Senor, in the street that is called the Street of the
Bridge of the Raven, there nowadays is no bridge at all; also, the
house is gone in which this Don Rodrigo de Ballesteros lived with his
raven in the days when he was alive. As to the raven, however, matters
are less certain. My grand-father long ago told me that more than
once, on nights of storm, he had heard that evil bird uttering his
wicked caws at midnight between the thunderclaps; and a most
respectable cargador of my acquaintance has given me his word for it
that he has heard those cawings too. Yet if they still go on it must
be the raven's spectre that gives voice to them; because, Senor, while
ravens are very long-lived birds, it is improbable that they live--and
that much time has passed since these matters happened--through more
than the whole of three hundred years.

This Don Rodrigo in his youth, Senor, was a Captain of Arcabuceros in
the Royal Army; and, it seems, he fought so well with his crossbowmen
at the battle of San Quintin (what they were fighting about I do not
know) that the King of Spain rewarded him--when the fighting was all
over and there was no more need for his services--by making him a
royal commissioner here in Mexico: that he might get rich comfortably
in his declining years. It was the Encomienda of Atzcapotzalco that
the King gave to him; and in those days Atzcapotzalco was a very rich
place, quite away from the City westward, and yielded a great revenue
for Don Rodrigo to have the fingering of. Nowadays, as you know,
Senor, it is almost a part of the City, because you get to it in the
electric cars so quickly; and it has lost its good fortune and is but
a dreary little threadbare town.

It was with the moneys which stuck to his fingers from his
collectorship--just as the King meant that they should stick, in
reward for his good fighting--that Don Rodrigo built for himself his
fine house in the street that is now called, because of the bridge
that once was a part of it, and because of the raven's doings, the
Puente del Cuervo. If that street had another name, earlier, Senor, I
do not know what it was.

This Don Rodrigo, as was generally known, was a very wicked person;
and therefore he lived in his fine house, along with his raven, in
great magnificence--eating always from dishes of solid silver, and
being served by pages wearing clothes embroidered with gold. But, for
all his riches, he himself was clad as though he were a beggar--and a
very dirty beggar at that. Over his jerkin and breeches he wore a long
capellar that wrapped him from his neck to his heels loosely; and this
capellar had been worn by him through so many years that it was shabby
beyond all respectability, and stained with stains of all colors, and
everywhere greasy and soiled. Yet on the front of it, upon his breast,
he wore the Cross of Santiago that the King had given him; and wearing
that cross, as you know, Senor, made him as much of a caballero as the
very best. In various other ways the evil that was in him showed
itself. He never went to mass, and he made fun openly of all holy
things. The suspicion was entertained by many people that he had
intimacies with heretics. Such conduct gives a man a very bad name
now; but it gave a man a worse name then--and so he was known
generally as the Excommunicate, which was the very worst name that
anybody could have.

As to the raven, Senor, Don Rodrigo himself named it El Diablo; and
that it truly was the devil--or, at least, that it was a devil--no one
ever doubted at all. The conduct of that reprobate bird was most
offensive. It would soil the rich furnishings of the house; it would
tear with its beak the embroidered coverings of the chairs and the
silken tapestries; it would throw down and shatter valuable pieces of
glass and porcelain; there was no end to its misdeeds. But when Don
Rodrigo stormed at his servants about these wreckings--and he was a
most violent man, Senor, and used tempestuous language--the servants
had only to tell him that the raven was the guilty one to pacify him
instantly. "If it is the work of the Devil," he would say without
anger, "it is well done!"--and so the matter would pass.

Suddenly, on a day, both Don Rodrigo and the raven disappeared. Their
going, in that strange and sudden way, made a great commotion; but
there was a greater commotion when the Alcalde--being called to look
into the matter--entered the house to search it and found a very
horrible thing. In the room that had been Don Rodrigo's bedroom, lying
dishonored upon the floor, broken and blood-spattered, was the most
holy image; and all about it were lying raven feathers, and they also
were spattered with blood. Therefore it was known that the raven-devil
and Don Rodrigo had beaten the holy image and had drawn blood from it;
and that the great devil, the master of both of them, in penalty for
their dreadful act of sacrilege, had snatched them suddenly home to
him to burn forever in hell. That was the very proper end of them.
Never were they seen again either on sea or land.

Naturally, Senor, respectable people declined to live in a house where
there had been such shocking doings. Even the people living in the
adjoining houses, feeling the disgrace that was on the neighborhood,
moved away from them. And so, slowly, as the years went on, all of
those houses crumbled to pieces and fell into ruins which were carted
away--and that is why they no longer are there. But it is generally
known, Senor, that until Don Rodrigo's house did in that way go out of
existence, Don Rodrigo continued to inhabit it; and that the raven
continued to bear him company.

Just a year from the time that the devil had snatched away to hell the
two of them--and it was at midnight, and a storm was upon the
City--the neighbors heard between the thunder-claps the clock on the
Palace striking its twelve strokes; and then, between the next
thunder-claps, they heard the raven caw twelve times. Then it became
known that the raven nightly took up its post on the parapet of the
bridge that was in that street; and that, when his cawing for midnight
was ended, he habitually flew up into the balcony of Don Rodrigo's
house; and that on the balcony he found Don Rodrigo--a yellow
skeleton, and over the bones of it the dirty old capellar--ready and
waiting for him. Don Rodrigo's skeleton would be sitting quite at its
ease on the balcony; on the railing of the balcony would be perched
the raven; and with his dry-bone fingers--making a little clicking
sound, like that of castanets--Don Rodrigo would stroke gently the
back of that intensely wicked bird. All this would show for a moment
while the lightning was flashing; then darkness would come, and a
crash of thunder; and after the thunder, in the black silence, the
little clicking sound of Don Rodrigo's dry-bone fingers stroking the
raven's back gently again would be heard.

And so it all went on, Senor, my grandfather told me, until the house
tumbled down with age, and these disagreeable horrors no longer were
possible; and it is most reasonably evident--since the street got its
name because of them--that they really must have happened, and that
they must have continued for a very long time.

As I have mentioned, Senor, my friend the cargador--who is a most
respectable and truthful person--declares that sometimes on stormy
nights he himself has heard the raven's cawings when the Palace clock
has finished its twelve strokes; and from that it would appear that
the raven is to be met with in the Puente del Cuervo even now.




