LEGEND OF THE CALLEJON DEL PADRE LECUONA


Who Padre Lecuona was, Senor, and what he did or had done to him in
this street that caused his name to be given to it, I do not know. The
Padre about whom I now am telling you, who had this strange thing
happen to him in this street, was named Lanza; but he was called by
everybody Lanchitas--according to our custom of giving such endearing
diminutives to the names of those whom we love. He deserved to be
loved, this excellent Padre Lanchitas: because he himself loved
everybody, and freely gave to all in sickness or in trouble his loving
aid. Confessing to him was a pleasure; and his absolution was worth
having, because it was given always with the approval of the good God.
My own grandfather knew him well, Senor, having known a man who had
seen him when he was a boy. Therefore this strange story about him is
true.

On a night--and it was a desponding night, because rain was falling
and there was a chill wind--Padre Lanchitas was hurrying to the house
of a friend of his, where every week he and three other gentlemen of a
Friday evening played malilla together. It is a very serious game,
Senor, and to play it well requires a large mind. He was late, and
that was why he was hurrying.

When he was nearly come to the house of his friend--and glad to get
there because of the rain and the cold--he was stopped by an old woman
plucking at his wet cloak and speaking to him. And the old woman
begged him for God's mercy to come quickly and confess a dying man.
Now that is a call, Senor, that a priest may not refuse; but because
his not joining them would inconvenience his friends, who could not
play at their game of malilla without him, he asked the woman why she
did not go to the parish priest of the parish in which the dying man
was. And the woman answered him that only to him would the dying man
confess; and she begged him again for God's mercy to hurry with her,
or the confession would not be made in time--and then the sin of his
refusal would be heavy on his own soul when he himself came to die.

So, then, the Padre went with her, walking behind her along the cold
dark streets in the mud with the rain falling; and at last she brought
him to the eastern end of this street that is called the Callejon del
Padre Lecuona, and to the long old house there that faces toward the
church of El Carmen and has a hump in the middle on the top of its
front wall. It is a very old house, Senor. It was built in the time
when we had Viceroys, instead of the President Porfirio; and it has no
windows--only a great door for the entering of carriages at one end of
it, and a small door in the middle of it, and another small door at
the other end. A person who sells charcoal, Senor, lives there now.

It was to the middle door that the woman brought Padre Lanchitas. The
door was not fastened, and at a touch she pushed it open and in they
went together--and the first thing that the Padre noticed when he was
come through the doorway was a very bad smell. It was the sort of
smell, Senor, that is found in very old houses of which all the doors
and windows have been shut fast for a very long time. But the Padre
had matters more important than bad smells to attend to, and all that
he did about it was to hold his handkerchief close to his nose. One
little poor candle, stuck on a nail in a board, was set in a far
corner; and in another corner was a man lying on a mat spread upon the
earth floor; and there was nothing else whatever--excepting cobwebs
everywhere, and the bad smell, and the old woman, and the Padre
himself--in that room.

That he might see him whom he was to confess, Padre Lanchitas took the
candle in his hand and went to the man on the mat and pulled aside the
ragged and dirty old blanket that covered him; and then he started
back with a very cold qualm in his stomach, saying to the woman: "This
man already is dead! He cannot confess! And he has the look of having
been dead for a very long while!" And that was true, Senor--for what
he saw was a dry and bony head, with yellow skin drawn tight over it,
having shut eyes deep sunken. Also, the two hands which rested crossed
upon the man's breast were no more than the same dry yellow skin
shrunk close over shrunken bones! And, seeing such a bad strange
sight, the Padre was uneasy and alarmed.

But the woman said back to him with assurance, yet also coaxingly:
"This man is going to confess, Padrecito"--and, so speaking, she
fetched from its far corner the board with the nail in it, and took
the candle from him and set it fast again upon the nail. And then the
man himself, in the light and in the shadow, sat up on the mat and
began to recite in a voice that had a rusty note in it the Confiteor
Deo--and after that, of course, there was nothing for the Padre to do
but to listen to him till the end.

What he told, Senor, being told under the seal of confession, of
course remained always a secret. But it was known, later, that he
spoke of matters which had happened a good two hundred years back--as
the Padre knew because he was a great reader of books of history; and
that he put himself into the very middle of those matters and made the
terrible crime that he had committed a part of them; and that he ended
by telling that in that ancient time he had been killed in a brawl
suddenly, and so had died unconfessed and unshriven, and that ever
since his soul had blistered in hell.

Hearing such wild talk from him, the Padre was well satisfied that the
poor man's wits were wandering in his fever--as happens with many,
Senor, in their dying time--and so bade him lie quietly and rest
himself; and promised that he would come to him and hear his
confession later on.

But the man cried out very urgently that that must not be: declaring
that by God's mercy he had been given one single chance to come back
again out of Eternity to confess his sins and to be shriven of them;
and that unless the Padre did hearken then and there to the confession
of his sins, and did shrive him of them, this one chance that God's
mercy had given him would be lost and wasted--and back he would go
forever to the hot torments of hell.

Therefore the Padre--being sure, by that time, that the man was quite
crazy in his fever--let him talk on till he had told the whole story
of his frightful sinnings; and then did shrive him, to quiet him--just
as you promise the moon to a sick, fretful child. And the devil must
have been very uneasy that night, Senor, because the good nature of
that kind-hearted priest lost to him what by rights was his own!

As Padre Lanchitas spoke the last words of the absolution, the man
fell back again on his mat with a sharp crackling sound like that of
dry bones rattling; and the woman had left the room; and the candle
was sputtering out its very last sparks. Therefore the Padre went out
in a hurry through the still open door into the street; and no sooner
had he come there than the door closed behind him sharply, as though
some one on the inside had pushed against it strongly to shut it fast.

Out in the street he had expected to find the old woman waiting for
him; and he looked about for her everywhere, desiring to tell her that
she must send for him when the man's fever left him--that he might
return and hear from the man a real confession, and really shrive him
of his sins. But the old woman was quite gone. Thinking that she must
have slipped past him in the darkness into the house, he knocked at
the door lightly, and then loudly; but no answer came to his
knocking--and when he tried to push the door open, using all his
strength, it held fast against his pushing as firmly as though it had
been a part of the stone wall.

So the Padre, having no liking for standing there in the cold and rain
uselessly, hurried onward to his friend's house--and was glad to get
into the room where his friends were waiting for him, and where plenty
of candles were burning, and where it was dry and warm.

He had walked so fast that his forehead was wet with sweat when he
took his hat off, and to dry it he put his hand into his pocket for
his handkerchief; but his handkerchief was not in his pocket--and then
he knew that he must have dropped it in the house where the dying man
lay. It was not just a common handkerchief, Senor, but one very finely
embroidered--having the letters standing for his name worked upon it,
with a wreath around them--that had been made for him by a nun of his
acquaintance in a convent of which he was the almoner; and so, as he
did not at all like to lose it, he sent his friend's servant to that
old house to get it back again. After a good long while, the servant
returned: telling that the house was shut fast, and that one of the
watch--seeing him knocking at the door of it--had told him that to
knock there was only to wear out his knuckles, because no one had
lived in that house for years and years!

All of this, as well as all that had gone before it, was so strange
and so full of mystery, that Padre Lanchitas then told to his three
friends some part of what that evening had happened to him; and it
chanced that one of the three was the notary who had in charge the
estate of which that very house was a part. And the notary gave Padre
Lanchitas his true word for it that the house--because of some
entangling law matters--had stood locked fast and empty for as much as
a lifetime; and he declared that Padre Lanchitas must be mixing that
house with some other house--which would be easy, since all that had
happened had been in the rainy dark. But the Padre, on his side, was
sure that he had made no mistake in the matter; and they both got a
little warm in their talk over it; and they ended by agreeing--so that
they might come to a sure settlement--to meet at that old house, and
the notary to bring with him the key of it, on the morning of the
following day.

So they did meet there, Senor, and they went to the middle door--the
one that had opened at a touch from the old woman's hand. But all
around that door, as the notary bade Padre Lanchitas observe before
they opened it, were unbroken cobwebs; and the keyhole was choked with
the dust that had blown into it, little by little, in the years that
had passed since it had known a key. And the other two doors of the
house were just the same. However, Padre Lanchitas would not admit,
even with that proof against him, that he was mistaken; and the
notary, smiling at him but willing to satisfy him, picked out the dust
from the keyhole and got the key into it and forced back hardly the
rusty bolt of the lock--and together they went inside.

Coming from the bright sunshine into that dusky place--lighted only
from the doorway, and the door but part way open because it was loose
on its old hinges and stuck fast--they could see at first nothing more
than that the room was empty and bare. What they did find, though--and
the Padre well remembered it--was the bad smell. But the notary said
that just such bad smells were in all old shut-up houses, and it
proved nothing; while the cobwebs and the closed keyhole did prove
most certainly that Padre Lanchitas had not entered that house the
night before--and that nobody had entered it for years and years. To
what the notary said there was nothing to be answered; and the
Padre--not satisfied, but forced to give in to such strong proof that
he was mistaken--was about to come away out of the house, and so have
done with it. But just then, Senor, he made a very wonderful and
horrifying discovery. By that time his eyes had grown accustomed to
the shadows; and so he saw over in one corner--lying on the floor
close beside where the man had lain whose confession he had taken--a
glint of something whitish. And, Senor, it was his very own
handkerchief that he had lost!

That was enough to satisfy even the notary; and as nothing more was to
be done there they came out, and gladly, from that bad dark place into
the sunshine. As for Padre Lanchitas, Senor, he was all mazed and
daunted--knowing then the terrible truth that he had confessed a dead
man; and, what was worse, that he had given absolution to a sinful
soul come hot to him from hell! He held his hat in his hand as he
came out from the house--and never did he put it on again: bareheaded
he went thenceforward until the end of his days! He was a very good
man, and his life had been always a very holy life; but from that time
on, till the death of him, he made it still holier by his prayings and
his fastings and his endless helpings of the poorest of the poor. At
last he died. And it is said, Senor, that in the walls of that old
house they found dead men's bones.




