LEGEND OF DON JUAN MANUEL


This Don Juan Manuel, Senor, was a rich and worthy gentleman who had
the bad vice of killing people. Every night at eleven o'clock, when
the Palace clock was striking, he went out from his magnificent
house--as you know, Senor, it still is standing in the street that has
been named after him--all muffled in his cloak, and under it his
dagger in his hand.

Then he would meet one, in the dark street, and would ask him
politely: "What is the hour of the night?" And that person, having
heard the striking of the clock, would answer: "It is eleven hours of
the night." And Don Juan Manuel would say to him: "Senor, you are
fortunate above all men, because you know precisely the hour at which
you die!" Then he would thrust with his dagger--and then, leaving the
dead gentleman lying in the street, he would come back again into his
own home. And this bad vice of Don Juan Manuel's of killing people
went on, Senor, for a great many years.

Living with Don Juan Manuel was a nephew whom he dearly loved. Every
night they supped together. Later, the nephew would go forth to see
one or another of his friends; and, still later, Don Juan Manuel would
go forth to kill some man. One night the nephew did not come home. Don
Juan Manuel was uneasy because of his not coming, fearing for him. In
the early morning the city watch knocked at Don Juan Manuel's door,
bringing there the dead body of the nephew--with a wound in the heart
of him that had killed him. And when they told where his body had been
found, Don Juan Manuel knew that he himself--not knowing him in the
darkness--had killed his own nephew whom he so loved.

Then Don Juan Manuel saw that he had been leading a bad life: and he
went to the Father to whom he confessed and confessed all the killings
that he had done. Then the Father put a penance upon him: That at
midnight he should go alone through the streets until he was come to
the chapel of the Espiracion (it faces upon the Plazuela de Santo
Domingo, Senor; and, in those days, before it was a gallows); and that
he should kneel in front of that chapel, beneath the gallows; and
that, so kneeling, he should tell his rosary through. And Don Juan
Manuel was pleased because so light a penance had been put upon him,
and thought soon to have peace again in his soul.

But that night, at midnight, when he set forth to do his penance, no
sooner was he come out from his own door than voices sounded in his
ears, and near him was the terrible ringing of a little bell. And he
knew that the voices which troubled him were those of the ones whom he
had killed. And the voices sounded in his ears so wofully, and the
ringing of the little bell was so terrible, that he could not keep
onward. Having gone a little way, his stomach was tormented by the
fear that was upon him and he came back again to his own home.

Then, the next day, he told the Father what had happened, and that he
could not do that penance, and asked that another be put upon him. But
the Father denied him any other penance; and bade him do that which
was set for him--or die in his sin and go forever to hell! Then Don
Juan Manuel again tried to do his penance, and that time got a half of
the way to the chapel of the Espiracion; and then again turned
backward to his home, because of those woful voices and the terrible
ringing of that little bell. And so again he asked that he be given
another penance; and again it was denied to him; and again--getting
that night three-quarters of the way to the chapel--he tried to do
what he was bidden to do. But he could not do it, because of the woful
voices and the terrible ringing of the little bell.

Then went he for the last time to the Father to beg for another
penance; and for the last time it was denied to him; and for the last
time he set forth from his house at midnight to go to the chapel of
the Espiracion, and in front of it, kneeling beneath the gallows, to
tell his rosary through. And that night, Senor, was the very worst
night of all! The voices were so loud and so very woful that he was in
weak dread of them, and he shook with fear, and his stomach was
tormented because of the terrible ringing of the little bell. But he
pressed on--you see, Senor, it was the only way to save his soul from
blistering in hell through all eternity--until he was come to the
Plazuela de Santo Domingo; and there, in front of the chapel of the
Espiracion, beneath the gallows, he knelt down upon his knees and told
his rosary through.

And in the morning, Senor, all the city was astonished, and
everybody--from the Viceroy down to the cargadores--came running to
the Plazuela de Santo Domingo, where was a sight to see! And the sight
was Don Juan Manuel hanging dead on the gallows--where the angels
themselves had hung him, Senor, because of his sins!




