LEGEND OF THE CALLEJON DEL MUERTO


It is an unwise thing, Senor, and there also is wickedness in it, to
make a vow to the Blessed Virgin--or, for that matter, to the smallest
saint in the whole calendar--and not to fulfil that vow when the
Blessed Virgin, or the saint, as the case may be, has performed
punctually all that the vow was made for: and so this gentleman of
whom I now am speaking found out for himself, and most uncomfortably,
when he died with an unfulfilled vow on his shoulders--and had to take
some of the time that he otherwise would have spent pleasantly in
heaven among the angels in order to do after he was dead what he had
promised to do, and what he most certainly ought to have done, while
he still was alive.

The name of this gentleman who so badly neglected his duty, Senor, was
Don Tristan de Alculer; and he was a humble but honorable Spanish
merchant who came from the Filipinas to live here in the City of
Mexico; and he came in the time when the Viceroy was the Marques de
Villa Manrique, and most likely as the result of that Viceroy's doings
and orderings: because the Marques de Villa Manrique gave great
attention to enlarging the trade with the East through the
Filipinas--as was found out by the English corsairs, so that Don
Francisco Draco, who was the greatest pirate of all of them, was able
to capture a galleon laden almost to sinking with nothing but silver
and gold.

With Don Tristan, who was of an elderliness, came his son to help him
in his merchanting; and this son was named Tristan also, and was a
most worthy young gentleman, very capable in the management of
mercantile affairs. Having in their purses but a light lining, their
commerce at its beginning was of a smallness; and they took for their
home a mean house in a little street so poor and so deserted that
nobody had taken the trouble to give a name to it: the very street
that ever since their time has been called the Alley of the Dead
Man--because of what happened as the result of Don Tristan's
unfulfilled vow. That they were most respectable people is made clear
by the fact that the Archbishop himself--who at that period was the
illustrious Don Fray Garcia de Santa Maria Mendoza--was the friend of
them; and especially the friend of Don Tristan the elder, who
frequently consulted with him in regard to the state of his soul.

So a number of prospering years passed on, Senor, and then, on a time,
Don Tristan the son went down to the coast to make some buyings: and
it was in the bad season, and the fever seized him so fiercely that
all in a moment the feet and half the legs of him fairly were inside
of death's door. Then it was that Don Tristan, being in sore trouble
because of his son's desperate illness, made the vow that I am telling
you about. He made it to the Blessed Virgin of Guadalupe; and he vowed
to her that if she would save his son alive to him from the fever he
would walk on his bare feet from his own house to her Sanctuary, and
that there in her Sanctuary he would make his thanks to her from the
deep depths of his soul. And the Blessed Virgin, being full of love
and of amiability, was pleased to listen to the prayer of Don Tristan,
and to believe the vow that went along with it: wherefore she caused
the fever immediately to leave the sick Don Tristan--and presently
home he came to his father alive and well.

But Don Tristan, having got from the Blessed Virgin all that he had
asked of her, did not give to her what he had promised to give to her
in return. Being by that time an aged gentleman, and also being much
afflicted with rheumatism, the thought of taking a walk of near to
three miles barefoot was most distasteful to him. And so he put his
walk off for a week or two--saying to himself that the Blessed Virgin
would not be in any hurry about the matter; and then he put it off for
another week or two; and in that way--because each time that he was
for keeping his vow shivers would come in his old feet at dread of
being bare and having cold earth under them, and trembles would come
in his old thin legs at dread of more rheumatism--the time slipped on
and on, and the Blessed Virgin did not get her due.

But his soul was not easy inside of him, Senor--and it could not be,
because he was playing fast and loose with it--and so he laid the
whole matter before his friend the Archbishop: hoping that for
friendship's sake the Archbishop would be so obliging as to dispense
him from his vow. For myself, Senor, I cannot but think that the
Archbishop--for all that his position put him in close touch with
heavenly matters, and gave him the right to deal with them--was not
well advised in his action. At any rate, what he did was to
tranquillize Don Tristan by telling him that the Blessed Virgin was
too considerate to hold him to a contract that certainly would lay him
up with a bad attack of rheumatism; and that even--so wearied out
would he be by forcing his old thin legs to carry him all that
distance--might be the death of him. And so the upshot of it was that
the Archbishop, being an easy-going and a very good-natured gentleman,
dispensed Don Tristan from his vow.

But a vow, Senor, is a vow--and even an Archbishop cannot cast one
loose from it; and so they all found out on this occasion, and in a
hurry--because the Blessed Virgin, while never huffed over trifles,
does not let the grass grow under her feet when her anger justly is
aroused.

Only three days after Don Tristan had received his dispensation--to
which, as the event proved, he was not entitled--the Archbishop went
on the twelfth of the month, in accordance with the custom observed in
that matter, to celebrate mass at the Villa de Guadalupe in Our Lady's
Sanctuary. The mass being ended, he came homeward on his mule by the
causeway to the City; and as he rode along easily he was put into a
great surprise by seeing Don Tristan walking toward him, and by
perceiving that he was of a most dismal dead paleness and that his
feet were bare. For a moment Don Tristan paused beside the
Archbishop--whose mule had stopped short, all in a tremble--and
clasped his hand with a hand that was of an icy coldness; then he
passed onward--saying in a dismal voice, rusty and cavernous, that for
his soul's saving he was fulfilling the vow that he had made to her
Ladyship: because the knowledge had come to him that if this vow were
not accomplished he certainly would spend the whole of Eternity
blistering in hell! Having thus explained matters, not a word more did
Don Tristan have to say for himself; nor did he even look backward, as
he walked away slowly and painfully on his bare old feet toward Our
Lady's shrine.

The Archbishop trembled as much as his mule did, Senor, being sure
that strange and terrible things were about him; and when the mule a
little came out of her fright and could march again, but still
trembling, he went straight to Don Tristan's house to find out--though
in his heart he knew what his finding would be--the full meaning of
this awesome prodigy. And he found at Don Tristan's house what he knew
in his heart he would find there: and that was Don Tristan, the four
lighted death-candles around him, lying on his bed death-struck--his
death-white cold hands clasped on his breast on the black pall
covering him, and on his death-white face the very look that was on it
as he went to the keeping of his unkept vow! Therefore the Archbishop
was seized with a hot and a cold shuddering, and his teeth rattled in
the head of him; and straightway he and all who were with
him--perceiving that they were in the presence of a divine
mystery--fell to their knees in wondering awe of what had happened,
and together prayed for the peace of Don Tristan's soul.

Very possibly, Senor, the Archbishop and the rest of them did not pray
hard enough; or, perhaps, Don Tristan's sin of neglect was so serious
a matter that a long spell in Purgatory was required of him before he
could be suffered to pass on to a more comfortable region and be at
ease. At any rate, almost immediately he took to walking at midnight
in the little street that for so long he had lived in--always wrapped
in a long white shroud that fluttered about him in the night wind
loosely, and carrying always a yellow-blazing great candle; and so
being a most terrifying personage to encounter as he marched slowly up
and down. Therefore everybody who dwelt in that street hurried to move
away from it, and Don Tristan had it quite to himself in its
desertedness--for which reason, as I have mentioned, the Alley of the
Dead Man became its name.

I have been told by my friend the cargador, Senor, and also by several
other trustworthy persons, that Don Tristan--though more than three
hundred years have passed since the death of him--has not entirely
given up his marchings. Certainly, for myself, I do not think that it
would be judicious to walk in the Callejon del Muerto at midnight even
now.




