About Demons



From the stories which have already been quoted some idea may be
gained of the part which evil spirits play in Russian popular fiction.
In one of them (No. 1) figures the ghoul which feeds on the dead, in
several (Nos. 37, 38, 45-48) we see the fiend-haunted corpse hungering
after human flesh and blood; the history of The Bad Wife (No. 7)
proves how a demon may suffer at a woman's hands, that of The Dead
Witch (No. 3) shows to what indignities the remains of a wicked woman
may be subjected by the fiends with whom she has chosen to associate.
In the Awful Drunkard (No. 6), and the Fiddler in Hell (No. 41),
the abode of evil spirits is portrayed, and some light is thrown on
their manners and customs; and in the Smith and the Demon (No. 13),
the portrait of one of their number is drawn in no unkindly spirit.
The difference which exists between the sketches of fiends contained
in these stories is clearly marked, so much so that it would of itself
be sufficient to prove that there is no slight confusion of ideas in
the minds of the Russian peasants with regard to the demoniacal beings
whom they generally call chorti or devils. Still more clearly is the
contrast between those ideas brought out by the other stories, many in
number, into which those powers of darkness enter. It is evident that
the traditions from which the popular conception of the ghostly enemy
has been evolved must have been of a complex and even conflicting
character.

Of very heterogeneous elements must have been composed the form under
which the popular fancy, in Russia as well as in other lands, has
embodied the abstract idea of evil. The diabolical characters in the
Russian tales and legends are constantly changing the proportions of
their figures, the nature of their attributes. In one story they seem
to belong to the great and widely subdivided family of Indian demons;
in another they appear to be akin to certain fiends of Turanian
extraction; in a third they display features which may have been
inherited from the forgotten deities of old Slavonic mythology; in all
the stories which belong to the "legendary class" they bear manifest
signs of having been subjected to Christian influences, the effect of
which has been insufficient to do more than slightly to disguise their
heathenism.

The old gods of the Slavonians have passed away and left behind but
scanty traces of their existence; but still, in the traditions and
proverbial expressions of the peasants in various Slavonic lands,
there may be recognized some relics of the older faith. Among these
are a few referring to a White and to a Black God. Thus, among the
peasants of White Russia some vague memory still exists of a white or
bright being, now called Byelun, who leads belated travellers out
of forests, and bestows gold on men who do him good service. "Dark is
it in the forest without Byelun" is one phrase; and another, spoken of
a man on whom fortune has smiled, is, "He must have made friends with
Byelun." On the other hand the memory of the black or evil god is
preserved in such imprecations as the Ukraine "May the black god smite
thee!" To ancient pagan traditions, also, into which a Christian
element has entered, may be assigned the popular belief that infants
which have been cursed by their mothers before their birth, or which
are suffocated during their sleep, or which die from any causes
unchristened or christened by a drunken priest, become the prey of
demons. This idea has given rise in Russia, as well as elsewhere, to a
large group of stories. The Russian peasants believe, it is said, that
in order to rescue from the fiends the soul of a babe which has been
suffocated in its sleep, its mother must spend three nights in a
church, standing within a circle traced by the hand of a priest. When
the cocks crow on the third morning, the demons will give her back her
dead child.

Great stress is laid in the skazkas and legends upon the terrible
power of a parent's curse. The "hasty word" of a father or a mother
will condemn even an innocent child to slavery among devils, and when
it has once been uttered, it is irrevocable. It might have been
supposed that the fearful efficacy of such an imprecation would have
silenced bad language, as that of the Vril rendered war impossible
among the Vril-ya of "The Coming Race;" but that such was not the case
is proved by the number of narratives which turn on uncalled-for
parental cursing. Here is an abridgment of one of these stories.

There was an old man who lived near Lake Onega, and who supported
himself and his wife by hunting. One day when he was engaged in the
pursuit of game, a well-dressed man met him and said,

"Sell me that dog of yours, and come for your money to the Mian
mountain to-morrow evening."

The old man sold him the dog, and went next day to the top of the
mountain, where he found a great city inhabited by devils. There
he soon found the house of his debtor, who provided him with a banquet
and a bath. And in the bath-room he was served by a young man who,
when the bath was over, fell at his feet, saying,

"Don't accept money for your dog, grandfather, but ask for me!"

The old man consented. "Give me that good youth," said he. "He shall
serve instead of a son to me."

There was no help for it; they had to give him the youth. And when the
old man had returned home, the youth told him to go to Novgorod, there
to enquire for a merchant, and ask him whether he had any children.

He did so, and the merchant replied,

"I had an only son, but his mother cursed him in a passion, crying,
'The devil take thee!' And so the devil carried him off."

It turned out that the youth whom the old man had saved from the
devils was that merchant's son. Thereupon the merchant rejoiced
greatly, and took the old man and his wife to live with him in his
house.

And here is another tale of the same kind, from the Vladimir
Government.

Once upon a time there was an old couple, and they had an only son.
His mother had cursed him before he was born, but he grew up and
married. Soon afterwards he suddenly disappeared. His parents did all
they could to trace him, but their attempts were in vain.

Now there was a hut in the forest not far off, and thither it chanced
that an old beggar came one night, and lay down to rest on the stove.
Before he had been there long, some one rode up to the door of the
hut, got off his horse, entered the hut, and remained there all night,
muttering incessantly:

"May the Lord judge my mother, in that she cursed me while a babe
unborn!"

Next morning the beggar went to the house of the old couple, and told
them all that had occurred. So towards evening the old man went to the
hut in the forest, and hid himself behind the stove. Presently the
horseman arrived, entered the hut, and began to repeat the words which
the beggar had overheard. The old man recognized his son, and came
forth to greet him, crying:

"O my dear son! at last I have found thee! never again will I let thee
go!"

"Follow me!" replied his son, who mounted his horse and rode away, his
father following him on foot. Presently they came to a river which was
frozen over, and in the ice was a hole. And the youth rode
straight into that hole, and in it both he and his horse disappeared.
The old man lingered long beside the ice-hole, then he returned home
and said to his wife:

"I have found our son, but it will be hard to get him back. Why, he
lives in the water!"

Next night the youth's mother went to the hut, but she succeeded no
better than her husband had done.

So on the third night his young wife went to the hut and hid behind
the stove. And when she heard the horseman enter she sprang forth,
exclaiming:

"My darling dear, my life-long spouse! now will I never part from
thee!"

"Follow me!" replied her husband.

And when they came to the edge of the ice-hole--

"If thou goest into the water, then will I follow after thee!" cried
she.

"If so, take off thy cross," he replied.

She took off her cross, leaped into the ice-hole--and found herself in
a vast hall. In it Satan was seated. And when he saw her arrive,
he asked her husband whom he had brought with him.

"This is my wife," replied the youth.

"Well then, if she is thy wife, get thee gone hence with her! married
folks must not be sundered."

So the wife rescued her husband, and brought him back from the devils
into the free light.

Sometimes it is a victim's own imprudence, and not a parent's "hasty
word," which has placed him in the power of the Evil One. There is a
well-known story, which has spread far and wide over Europe, of a
soldier who abstains for a term of years from washing, shaving, and
hair-combing, and who serves, or at least obeys, the devil during that
time, at the end of which he is rewarded by the fiend with great
wealth. His appearance being against him, he has some difficulty in
finding a wife, rich as he is. But after the elder sisters of a family
have refused him, the youngest accepts him; whereupon he allows
himself to be cleansed, combed, and dressed in bright apparel, and
leads a cleanly and a happy life ever afterwards.

In one of the German versions of this story, a king's elder daughter,
when asked to marry her rich but slovenly suitor, replies, "I would
sooner go into the deepest water than do that." In a Russian
version, the unwashed soldier lends a large sum of money to an
impoverished monarch, who cannot pay his troops, and asks his royal
creditor to give him one of his daughters in marriage by way of
recompense. The king reflects. He is sorry for his daughters, but at
the same time he cannot do without the money. At last, he tells the
soldier to get his portrait painted, and promises to show it to the
princesses, and see if one of them will accept him. The soldier has
his likeness taken, "touch for touch, just exactly as he is," and the
king shows it to his daughters. The eldest princess sees that "the
picture is that of a monster, with dishevelled hair, and uncut nails,
and unwiped nose," and cries:

"I won't have him! I'd sooner have the devil!"

Now the devil "was standing behind her, pen and paper in hand. He
heard what she said, and booked her soul."

When the second princess is asked whether she will marry the soldier,
she exclaims:

"No indeed! I'd rather die an old maid, I'd sooner be linked with the
devil, than marry that man!"

When the devil heard that, "he booked her soul too."

But the youngest princess, the Cordelia of the family, when she is
asked whether she will marry the man who has helped her father in his
need, replies:

"It's fated I must, it seems! I'll marry him, and then--God's will be
done!"

While the preparations are being made for the marriage, the soldier
arrives at the end of his term of service to "the little devil" who
had hired him, and from whom he had received his wealth in return for
his abstinence and cleanliness. So he calls the "little devil," and
says, "Now turn me into a nice young man."

Accordingly "the little devil cut him up into small pieces, threw them
into a cauldron and set them on to boil. When they were done enough,
he took them out and put them together again properly--bone to bone,
joint to joint, vein to vein. Then he sprinkled them with the Waters
of Life and Death--and up jumped the soldier, a finer lad than stories
can describe, or pens portray!"

The story does not end here. When the "little devil" returns to the
lake from which he came, "the grandfather" of the demons asks him--

"How about the soldier?"

"He has served his time honestly and honorably," is the reply. "Never
once did he shave, have his hair cut, wipe his nose, or change his
clothes." The "grandfather" flies into a passion.

"What! in fifteen whole years you couldn't entrap a soldier! What, all
that money wasted for nothing! What sort of a devil do you call
yourself after that?"--and ordered him to be flung "into boiling
pitch."

"Stop, grandfather!" replies his grandchild. "I've booked two souls
instead of the soldier's one."

"How's that?"

"Why, this way. The soldier wanted to marry one of three princesses,
but the elder one and the second one told their father that they'd
sooner marry the devil than the soldier. So you see both of them are
ours."

After he had heard this explanation, "the grandfather acknowledged
that the little devil was in the right, and ordered him to be set
free. The imp, you see, understood his business."

As the idea that "a hasty word" can place its utterer or its victim
in the power of the Evil One (not only after death, but also during
this life) has given rise to numerous Russian legends, and as it still
exists, to some extent, as a living faith in the minds of the Russian
peasantry, it may be as well to quote at length one of the stories in
which it is embodied. It will be recognized as a variant of the
stories about the youth who visits the "Water King" and elopes with
one of that monarch's daughters. The main difference between the
"legend" we are about to quote, and the skazkas which have already
been quoted, is that a devil of the Satanic type is substituted in it
for the mythical personage--whether Slavonic Neptune or Indian
Rakshasa--who played a similar part in them.



