THE PRIEST WITH THE GREEDY EYES




  In the parish of St. Nicholas there lived a Pope. This
  Pope's eyes were thoroughly pope-like. He served Nicholas
  several years, and went on serving until such time as there
  remained to him nothing either for board or lodging. Then our
  Pope collected all the church keys, looked at the picture of
  Nicholas, thumped him, out of spite, over the shoulders with
  the keys, and went forth from his parish as his eyes led him.
  And as he walked along the road he suddenly lighted upon an
  unknown man.

  "Hail, good man!" said the stranger to the Pope. "Whence
  do you come and whither are you going? Take me with you
  as a companion."

  Well, they went on together. They walked and walked for
  several versts, then they grew tired. It was time to seek repose.
  Now the Pope had a few biscuits in his cassock, and the companion
  he had picked up had a couple of small loaves.

  "Let's eat your loaves first," says the Pope, "and afterwards
  we'll take to the biscuits, too."

  "Agreed!" replies the stranger. "We'll eat my loaves,
  and keep your biscuits for afterwards."

  Well, they ate away at the loaves; each of them ate his fill,
  but the loaves got no smaller. The Pope grew envious:
  "Come," thinks he, "I'll steal them from him!" After the
  meal the old man lay down to take a nap, but the Pope kept
  scheming how to steal the loaves from him. The old man went
  to sleep. The Pope drew the loaves out of his pocket and
  began quietly nibbling them at his seat. The old man awoke
  and felt for his loaves; they were gone!

  "Where are my loaves?" he exclaimed; "who has eaten
  them? was it you, Pope?"

  "No, not I, on my word!" replied the Pope.

  "Well, so be it," said the old man.

  They gave themselves a shake, and set out again on their
  journey. They walked and walked; suddenly the road branched
  off in two different directions. Well, they both went the same
  way, and soon reached a certain country. In that country the
  King's daughter lay at the point of death, and the King had given
  notice that to him who should cure his daughter he would give
  half of his kingdom, and half of his goods and possessions; but
  if any one undertook to cure her and failed, he should have his
  head chopped off and hung up on a stake. Well, they arrived,
  elbowed their way among the people in front of the King's palace,
  and gave out that they were doctors. The servant came out
  from the King's palace, and began questioning them:

  "Who are you? from what cities, of what families? what
  do you want?"

  "We are doctors," they replied; "we can cure the Princess!"

  "Oh! if you are doctors, come into the palace."

  So they went into the palace, saw the Princess, and asked
  the King to supply them with a private apartment, a tub of
  water, a sharp sword, and a big table. The King supplied
  them with all these things. Then they shut themselves up in
  the private apartment, laid the Princess on the big table, cut
  her into small pieces with the sharp sword, flung them into the
  tub of water, washed them, and rinsed them. Afterwards they
  began putting the pieces together; when the old man breathed
  on them the different pieces stuck together. When he had put
  all the pieces together properly, he gave them a final puff of
  breath: the Princess began to quiver, and then arose alive and
  well! The King came in person to the door of their room, and
  cried:

  "In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
  Ghost!"

  "Amen!" they replied.

  "Have you cured the Princess?" asked the King.

  "We've cured her," say the doctors. "Here she is!"

  Out went the Princess to the King, alive and well.

  Says the King to the doctors: "What sort of valuables will
  you have? would you like gold or silver? Take whatever you
  please."

  Well, they began taking gold and silver. The old man used
  only a thumb and two fingers, but the Pope seized whole handfuls,
  and kept on stowing them away in his wallet--shovelling
  them into it, and then lifting it a bit to see if he was strong
  enough to carry it.

  At last they took their leave of the King and went their way.
  The old man said to the Pope, "We'll bury this money in the
  ground, and go and make another cure." Well, they walked
  and walked, and at length they reached another country. In
  that country, also, the King had a daughter at the point of death,
  and he had given notice that whoever cured his daughter should
  have half of his kingdom and of his goods and possessions; but
  if he failed to cure her he should have his head chopped off and
  hung up on a stake. Then the Evil One afflicted the envious
  Pope, suggesting to him "Why shouldn't he go and perform
  the cure by himself, without saying a word to the old man, and
  so lay hold of all the gold and silver for himself?" So the
  Pope walked about in front of the royal gates, forced himself on
  the notice of the people there, and gave out that he was a doctor.
  In the same way as before he asked the King for a private
  room, a tub of water, a large table, and a sharp sword. Shutting
  himself up in the private room, he laid the Princess on the table,
  and began chopping her up with the sharp sword; and however
  much the Princess might scream or squeal, the Pope, without
  paying any attention to either screaming or squealing, went on
  chopping and chopping just as if she had been so much beef.
  And when he had chopped her up into little pieces, he threw
  them into the tub, washed them, rinsed them, and then put
  them together bit by bit, exactly as the old man had done, expecting
  to see all the pieces unite with each other. He breathes
  on them--but nothing happens! He gives another puff--worse
  than ever! See, the Pope flings the pieces back again into the
  water, washes and washes, rinses and rinses, and again puts
  them together bit by bit. Again he breathes on them--but still
  nothing comes of it.

  "Woe is me," thinks the Pope; "here's a mess!"

  Next morning the King arrives and looks--the doctor has
  had no success at all--he's only messed the dead body all over
  with muck!

  The King ordered the doctor off to the gallows. Then our
  Pope besought him, crying--

  "O King! O free to do thy will! Spare me for a little
  time! I will run for the old man, he will cure the Princess."

  The Pope ran off in search of the old man. He found the
  old man, and cried:

  "Old man! I am guilty, wretch that I am! The Devil
  got hold of me. I wanted to cure the King's daughter all by
  myself, but I couldn't. Now they're going to hang me. Do
  help me!"

  The old man returned with the Pope.

  The Pope was taken to the gallows. Says the old man to
  the Pope:

  "Pope! who ate my loaves?"

  "Not I, on my word! So help me Heaven, not I!"

  The Pope was hoisted on to the second step. Says the old
  man to the Pope:

  "Pope! who ate my loaves?"

  "Not I, on my word! So help me Heaven, not I!"

  He mounted the third step--and again it was "Not I!"
  And now his head was actually in the noose--but it's "Not I!"
  all the same. Well, there was nothing to be done! Says the
  old man to the King:

  "O King! O free to do thy will! Permit me to cure the
  Princess. And if I do not cure her, order another noose to be
  got ready. A noose for me, and a noose for the Pope!"

  Well, the old man put the pieces of the Princess's body together,
  bit by bit, and breathed on them--and the Princess stood
  up alive and well. The King recompensed them both with
  silver and gold.

  "Let's go and divide the money, Pope," said the old man.

  So they went. They divided the money into three heaps.
  The Pope looked at them, and said:

  "How's this? There's only two of us. For whom is this
  third share?"

  "That," says the old man, "is for him who ate my loaves."

  "I ate them, old man," cries the Pope; "I did really, so
  help me Heaven!"

  "Then the money is yours," says the old man. "Take my
  share too. And now go and serve in your parish faithfully;
  don't be greedy, and don't go hitting Nicholas over the shoulders
  with the keys."

  Thus spake the old man, and straightway disappeared.



