THE DEAD MOTHER



  In a certain village there lived a husband and wife--lived happily,
  lovingly, peaceably. All their neighbors envied them; the
  sight of them gave pleasure to honest folks. Well, the mistress
  bore a son, but directly after it was born she died.
  The poor moujik moaned and wept. Above all he was in despair
  about the babe. How was he to nourish it now? how to
  bring it up without its mother? He did what was best, and
  hired an old woman to look after it. Only here was a wonder!
  all day long the babe would take no food, and did nothing but
  cry; there was no soothing it anyhow. But during (a great
  part of) the night one could fancy it wasn't there at all, so silently
  and peacefully did it sleep.

  "What's the meaning of this?" thinks the old woman; "suppose
  I keep awake to-night; may be I shall find out."

  Well, just at midnight she heard some one quietly open the
  door and go up to the cradle. The babe became still, just as if
  it was being suckled.

  The next night the same thing took place, and the third
  night, too. Then she told the moujik about it. He called his
  kinsfolk together, and held counsel with them. They determined
  on this; to keep awake on a certain night, and to spy out
  who it was that came to suckle the babe. So at eventide they
  all lay down on the floor, and beside them they set a lighted
  taper hidden in an earthen pot.

  At midnight the cottage door opened. Some one stepped
  up to the cradle. The babe became still. At that moment one
  of the kinsfolk suddenly brought out the light. They looked,
  and saw the dead mother, in the very same clothes in which
  she had been buried, on her knees besides the cradle, over
  which she bent as she suckled the babe at her dead breast.

  The moment the light shone in the cottage she stood up,
  gazed sadly on her little one, and then went out of the room
  without a sound, not saying a word to anyone. All those who
  saw her stood for a time terror-struck; and then they found the
  babe was dead.

The second story will serve as an illustration of one of the Russian
customs with respect to the dead, and also of the ideas about
witchcraft, still prevalent in Russia. We may create for it the title
of the Dead Witch.



