THE LESHY



  A certain priest's daughter went strolling in the forest one day,
  without having obtained leave from her father or her mother--and
  she disappeared utterly. Three years went by. Now in
  the village in which her parents dwelt there lived a bold hunter,
  who went daily roaming through the thick woods with his dog and
  his gun. One day he was going through the forest; all of a sudden
  his dog began to bark, and the hair of its back bristled up.
  The sportsman looked, and saw lying in the woodland path before
  him a log, and on the log there sat a moujik plaiting a bast
  shoe. And as he plaited the shoe, he kept looking up at the
  moon, and saying with a menacing gesture:--

  "Shine, shine, O bright moon!"

  The sportsman was astounded. "How comes it," thinks he,
  "that the moujik looks like that?--he is still young; but his
  hair is grey as a badger's."

  He only thought these words, but the other replied, as if
  guessing what he meant:--

  "Grey am I, being the devil's grandfather!"

  Then the sportsman guessed that he had before him no mere
  moujik, but a Leshy. He levelled his gun and--bang! he let
  him have it right in the paunch. The Leshy groaned, and
  seemed to be going to fall across the log; but directly afterwards
  he got up and dragged himself into the thickets. After
  him ran the dog in pursuit, and after the dog followed the sportsman.
  He walked and walked, and came to a hill: in that hill
  was a fissure, and in the fissure stood a hut. He entered the
  hut--there on a bench lay the Leshy stone dead, and by his
  side a damsel, exclaiming, amid bitter tears:--

  "Who now will give me to eat and to drink?"

  "Hail, fair maiden!" says the hunter. "Tell me whence
  thou comest, and whose daughter thou art?"

  "Ah, good youth! I know not that myself, any more than if
  I had never seen the free light--never known a father and
  mother."

  "Well, get ready as soon as you can. I will take you back
  to Holy Russia."

  So he took her away with him, and brought her out of the
  forest. And all the way he went along, he cut marks on the
  trees. Now this damsel had been carried off by the Leshy, and
  had lived in his hut for three years--her clothes were all worn
  out, or had got torn off her back, so that she was stark naked
  but she wasn't a bit ashamed of that. When they reached the
  village, the sportsman began asking whether there was any one
  there who had lost a girl. Up came the priest, and cried, "Why,
  that's my daughter." Up came running the priest's wife, and
  cried:--

  "O thou dear child! where hast thou been so long? I had
  no hope of ever seeing thee again."

  But the girl gazed and just blinked with her eyes, understanding
  nothing. After a time, however, she began slowly to come
  back to her senses. Then the priest and his wife gave her in
  marriage to the hunter, and rewarded him with all sorts of good
  things. And they went in search of the hut in which she had
  lived while she was with the Leshy. Long did they wander
  about the forest; but that hut they never found.

To another group of personifications belong those of the Rivers. About
them many stories are current, generally having reference to their
alleged jealousies and disputes. Thus it is said that when God was
allotting their shares to the rivers, the Desna did not come in time,
and so failed to obtain precedence over the Dnieper.

"Try and get before him yourself," said the Lord.

The Desna set off at full speed, but in spite of all her attempts, the
Dnieper always kept ahead of her until he fell into the sea, where the
Desna was obliged to join him.

About the Volga and its affluent, the Vazuza, the following story is
told: Vazuza and Volga.



