BIRD GIRL


Once upon a time lived a king, who had only one son; and when this son
grew up, his father sent him to travel about the world, in order that
he might find a maiden who would make him a suitable wife.

The king's son started on his journey, and travelled through the whole
world without finding anywhere a maiden whom he loved well enough to
marry. Seeing then that he had taken so much trouble, and had spent so
much time and money, and all to no purpose, he resolved to kill
himself. With this intention, he climbed to the top of a high
mountain, that he might throw himself from its summit; for he wished
that even his bones might never be found. Having arrived at the top of
the mountain, he saw a sharp rock jutting out from one side of it, and
was climbing up to throw himself from it, when he heard a voice behind
him calling, 'Stop! stop! O man! Stop for the sake of three hundred
and sixty-five which are in the year!' He looked back, and seeing no
one, asked, 'Who are you that speak to me? Let me see you? When you
know how miserable I am, you will not prevent me killing myself!'

He had scarcely said these words when there appeared to him an old
man, with hair as white as wool, who said, 'I know all about you. But
listen! Do you see that high hill?' 'Yes, I do,' said the prince. 'And
do you see the multitude of marble blocks which are on it?' said the
old man. 'Yes, I do,' rejoined the prince. 'Well, then,' continued the
old man, 'on the summit of that hill there is an old woman with golden
hair, who sits night and day on that very spot, and holds a bird in
her bosom. Whoever can get this bird into his hands, will be the
happiest man in the world. But, be careful. If you are willing to try
and get the bird, you must take the old woman by her hair before she
sees you. If she sees you before you catch her by her hair, you will
be changed into a stone on the spot. Thus it happened to all those
young men you see standing there, as if they were blocks of marble.'

When the king's son heard this, he thought, 'It is all one to me
whether I die here or there. If I succeed, so much the better for me;
if I fail, I can but die as I had resolved.' So he went up the hill.
When he arrived near the old woman, he walked very cautiously towards
her, hoping to reach her unseen; for, luckily, the old woman was lying
with her back towards him, sunning herself, and playing with the bird.

When near enough, he sprang suddenly and caught her by the hair. Then
the old woman cried out, so that the whole hill shook as with a great
earthquake; but the king's son held fast by her hair, and when she
found that she could not escape she said, 'What do you desire from
me?' He replied, 'That you should give me the bird in your bosom, and
that you call back to life all these Christian souls!' The old woman
consented, and gave him the bird. Then from her mouth she breathed a
blue wind towards the men of stone, and immediately they again became
alive. The king's son, having the bird in his hands, was so rejoiced,
that he began to kiss it; and, as he kissed it, the bird was
transformed into a most beautiful maiden.

This girl the enchantress had turned into a bird, in order that she
might allure the young men to her. The girl pleased the king's son
exceedingly, and he took her with him, and prepared to return home. As
he was going down the hill, the girl gave him a stick, and told him
the stick would do everything that he desired of it. So the king's son
struck with it once upon the rock, and in a moment there came out a
mass of golden coin, of which they took plenty for use on their
journey. As they were travelling they came to a great river, and could
find no place by which they could pass over; so the king's son touched
the surface of the river with his stick, and the water divided, so
that a dry path lay before them, and they were able to cross over the
river dryshod. A little farther they came to a herd of wolves, and the
wolves attacked them, and seemed about to tear them to pieces; but the
prince struck at them with his stick, and one by one the wolves were
turned into ants. Thus, at length, the king's son reached home safely
with his beloved, and they were shortly after married, and lived long
and happily together.




