THE WICKED STEPMOTHER


There was once on a time a stepmother who hated her step-daughter
exceedingly, because she was more beautiful than her own daughter whom
she had brought with her into the house. By-and-by, the father learned
also to hate his own child: he scolded her, and beat her, in order to
please his wife. One day his wife said to him, 'Let us send your
daughter away! Let her look out for herself in the world!' Upon this
the man asked, 'Where can we send her? Where can the poor girl go
alone?' To this the wife answered, 'If you will not do this, husband,
I will no longer live with you. You had better take her to-morrow out
of the house. You can lead her into the forest, and then steal away
from her and hurry home!' She repeated this so often that at length he
consented, but said, 'At least prepare the girl something for her
journey, that she may not die the first day of hunger.'

The stepmother thereupon made a cake, and, the next morning early, the
father led the girl far away into the very heart of the forest, and
there left her and went back home.

The poor girl, thus left alone, wandered all day about the wood
seeking for a path, but could find no way out of it. When it grew dark
she got up into a tree to pass the night, fearing lest some wild
beasts would eat her if she remained on the ground. And, indeed, all
night long the wolves were howling under the tree, so that the poor
girl trembled so much that she could hardly keep her herself from
falling. When day dawned she descended from the tree and walked on
again, hoping to find some way out of the forest. But the wood grew
thicker and thicker, and seemed to have no end. In the evening whilst
she was looking for a tree in which she might remain safely over the
night, all at once she saw something shining in the forest. So she
went on, hoping to find some shelter, and at length came to a fine
large house. The gates were open, so she went in, and walked through a
great many rooms, each one more beautiful than the other. On a table
in one room she found a candle burning. She thought this must be the
house of some robbers; but she was not afraid, for she reasoned with
herself, 'Rich men have reason to fear robbers, but I have none--I
will tell them that I will serve them gladly for a piece of bread.'

She then took the cake from her bag, said grace, and began to eat.
Just as she had begun to eat a cock came into the room, and sprung
upon the table to reach the cake, so the girl crumbled some of it for
him. Then a little dog came in and jumped quite friendly upon her, so
she broke a piece from her cake for the little dog, and took him on
her knee, and petted and fed him. After that came in a cat also, and
the girl fed her too.

At length the girl heard a loud noise as if some great beast was
coming, and was greatly frightened when a lion came into the room. But
the lion moved his tail in such a friendly way, and looked so very
kindly, that she took heart, and offered him a piece of her cake. The
lion took it and began to lick her hand, and the girl had no longer
any fear of him, so she stroked him gently and fed him with the rest
of the cake. Suddenly she heard a great noise of weapons, and almost
swooned as a creature in a bear-skin entered the room. The cock, the
dog, the cat, and the lion, all ran to it, and jumped about it
affectionately, showing in all possible ways their great joy. The poor
girl thought it a very strange beast, and expected it would jump upon
her and kill her. But the fearful thing threw the bear-skin from its
head and shoulders, and all the room shone and glittered with its
golden garments. The poor girl almost lost her senses when she saw
before her a handsome man, beautifully dressed. But he came up to her
and said, 'Don't be afraid, my dear! I am not a bad man, I am the son
of the king, and when I wish to hunt I come here and use this
bear-skin as a disguise lest the people should recognise me. Those who
see me believe that I am a ghost and run away from me. No one dares to
come into this house, knowing that I often come here. You are the only
person who has ventured in. How did you know that I am not a ghost?'

Then she told him she had never heard of him nor of the house, but
that her stepmother had driven her away from home, and she told him
all that had happened to her. When he heard this, he was very sorry,
and said, 'Your stepmother hated you, but God has been kind to you. I
will marry you if you are willing to be my wife--will you consent?'
'Yes!' she replied. Next day he took her to his father's palace and
married her. After some time she begged to be allowed to go to see her
father. So her husband allowed her to go, and she dressed herself all
in gold and went to her father's house. The father happened to be away
from home, and the stepmother, seeing her coming, was afraid lest she
had come to revenge herself. So she hurried to meet her and said, 'You
see that it was I who sent you on the road to happiness.' The
step-daughter kissed her, and embraced her step-sister. Then the girl
said she was very sorry that she had not found her father at home,
and, on her going away, she gave plenty of money to her stepmother.
When, however, she had gone away the stepmother shook her fist after
her and cried, 'Wait a little, you shall not be the only one so
dressed out; to-morrow I will send my own daughter after you the same
way!'

When her husband came home at night she told him all that had
happened, and said, 'What do you think, husband? would it not be a
good thing to send my girl also into the wood to try her fortune; for
your girl, whom we sent there, never came back until now, and now she
has come glittering in gold?'

The man sighed and agreed to the proposal. Next day the stepmother
prepared for her daughter plenty of cakes and roasted meats, and then
sent her with the father into the forest. The man led her deep into
the forest, as he had done his own daughter, and there left her.
Finding the father did not return, she began to seek a way to get
home, and soon came in sight of the house in the forest. She entered
it, and seeing no one, fastened the door inside, saying as she did so,
'If God himself comes I will not open to Him.' Then she took out of
her bag the baked meats and cakes and began to eat. Whilst she was
eating, the cock, the dog, and the cat came in suddenly, and began to
play about her affectionately, hoping she would give them something;
but she became quite angry, and exclaimed, 'The devil take you! I have
hardly enough for myself: do you think I will give any to you?' Then
she began to beat them; whereat the dog howled, and the lion hearing
it rushed in furiously, caught the girl and killed her.

Next day the king's son came with his wife to hunt. She immediately
recognised her sister's dress, and gathered together the fragments of
the body, which she took to her stepmother. She found her father at
home this time, and he was greatly pleased to hear that his daughter
was married to the king's son. When, however, he heard what had
happened with the daughter of his wife, he was very sorry, but said,
'Her mother has deserved this from the hand of God, because she hated
you without a cause. There she is at the well, I will go and tell
her.'

When the stepmother heard what had happened to her daughter, she said
to her husband, 'I cannot bear your daughter! I cannot bear to look at
her! Let us kill her and her husband. If you will not consent, I will
jump down into this well!' 'I cannot kill my own child,' returned he.
'Well, then,' cried she, 'if _you_ will not kill her, _I_ cannot
endure her!' and so she jumped down into the well.




