GOOD DEEDS ARE NEVER LOST


In days gone by there lived a married couple who had one only son.
When he grew up they made him learn something which would be of use to
him in after-life. He was a kind, quiet boy, and feared God greatly.
After his schooling was finished his father gave him a ship, freighted
with various sorts of merchandise, so that he might go and trade about
the world, and grow rich, and become a help to his parents in their
old age. The son put to sea, and one day the ship he was in met with a
Turkish vessel in which he heard great weeping and wailing. So he
demanded of the Turkish sailors, 'Pray, tell me why there is so much
wailing on board your ship?' and they answered, 'We are carrying
slaves which we have captured in different countries, and those who
are chained are weeping.'

Then he said, 'Please, brothers, ask your captain if he would give me
the slaves for ready cash?'

The captain gladly agreed to the proposal, and after much bargaining
the young man gave to the captain his vessel full of merchandise, and
received in exchange the ship full of slaves.

Then he called the slaves before him, and demanded of each whence he
came, and told them all they were free to return to their own
countries. At last he came to an old woman who held close to her side
a very beautiful girl, and he asked them from what country they came.
The old woman told him, weeping, that they came from a very distant
land, saying, 'This young girl is the only daughter of the king, and I
am her nurse, and have taken care of her from her childhood. One day,
unhappily, she went to walk in a garden far away from the palace, and
these wicked Turks saw her and caught her. Luckily I happened to be
near, and, hearing her scream, ran to her help, and so the Turks
caught me too, and brought us both on board of this ship.' Then the
old woman and the beautiful girl, being so far from their own country,
and having no means of getting there, begged him that he would take
them with him. So he married the girl, took her with him, and returned
home.

When he arrived his father asked him about his ship and merchandise,
and he told him what had happened, how he had given his vessel with
its cargo, and had bought the slaves and set them free. 'This girl,'
continued he, 'is a king's daughter, and the old woman her nurse; as
they could not get back to their country, they prayed to remain with
me, so I married the girl.'

Thereupon the father was very angry, and said, 'My foolish son! what
have you done? Why have you made away with my property without cause
and of your own will?' and he drove him out of the house.

Then the son lived with his wife and her old nurse a long time in the
same village, trying always, through the good offices of his mother
and other friends, to obtain his father's forgiveness, and, begging
him to let him have a second ship full of merchandise, promised to be
wiser in future. After some time the father took pity on him, and
received him again into his house, with his wife and her old nurse.
Shortly after he fitted him out another ship, larger than the first
one, and filled with more valuable merchandise. In this he sailed,
leaving his wife and her nurse in the house of his parents. He came
one day to a city where he found the soldiers very busy carrying some
unlucky villagers away to prison. So he asked them, 'Why are you doing
this my brethren? Why are you driving these poor people to prison?'
and the soldiers answered:

'They have not paid the king's taxes, that is why we take them to
prison.'

Then he went to the magistrate and asked, 'Please tell me how much
these poor prisoners owe?'

When the magistrate told him he sold his goods and ship, and paid the
debts of all the prisoners, and returned home without anything.
Falling at the feet of his father, he told him what he had done, and
begged him to forgive him. But the father was exceedingly angry, more
so than before, and drove him away from his presence. What could the
unhappy son do in this great strait? How could he go begging, he whose
parents were so rich? After some time his friends again prevailed upon
the father to receive him back, because, as they urged, so much
suffering had made him wiser. At last the father yielded, took him
again into his house, and prepared a ship for him finer and richer
than the two former ones. Then the son had the portrait of his wife
painted on the helm, and that of the old nurse on the stern, and,
after taking leave of his father and mother, and wife, he sailed away
the third time.

After sailing for some days he came near a large city, in which there
lived a king, and, dropping anchor, he fired a salute to the city. All
the citizens wondered, as did also their king, and no one could say
who the captain of the strange ship might be. In the afternoon the
king sent one of his ministers to ask who he was, and why he came; and
the minister brought a message that the king himself would come at
nine o'clock the next morning to see the ship. When the minister came
he saw on the helm the portrait of the king's daughter, and on the
stern that of her old nurse, and in his surprise and joy dared not
believe his own eyes. For the princess had been promised to him in
marriage while she was yet a child, and long before she was captured
by the Turks.

But the minister did not tell any one what he had seen.

Next morning, at nine o'clock, the king came with his ministers on
board the ship, and asked the captain who he was, and whence he came?

Whilst walking about the vessel he saw there the portrait of the girl
on the helm and that of the old woman on the stern, and recognised the
features of his own daughter and her old nurse who had been captured
by the Turks. But his joy was so great, he dared not believe his eyes,
so he invited the captain to come that afternoon to his palace to
relate his adventures, hoping thus to find out if his hopes were well
founded.

In the afternoon, in obedience to the king's wish, he went to the
palace, and the king at once began to inquire why the figure of the
girl was painted on the helm and that of the old woman on the stern.
The captain guessed at once that this king must be his wife's father,
so he told him everything that had happened--how he had met the
Turkish ship filled with slaves, and had ransomed them and set them
free. 'This girl, alone,' he continued, 'with her old nurse, had
nowhere to go, as her country was so far off, so they asked to remain
with me, and I married the girl.'

When the king heard this he exclaimed, 'That girl is my only child,
and the accursed Turks took her and her old nurse. You, since you are
her husband, will be the heir to my crown. But go--go at once to your
home and bring me your wife that I may see her--my only daughter,
before I die. Bring your father, your mother, bring all your family.
Let your property be all sold in that country, and come all of you
here. Your father shall be my brother, and your mother my sister, as
you are my son and the heir to my crown. We will all live together
here in one palace.' Then he called the queen, and all his ministers,
and told them all about his daughter. And there was great rejoicing
and festivity in the whole court.

After this the king gave his son-in-law his own large ship to bring
back the princess and the whole family. So the captain left his own
ship there, but he asked the king to send one of his ministers with
him, 'Lest they should not believe me,' he said; and the king gave him
as a companion for his voyage the same minister to whom he had
formerly promised the princess in marriage. They arrived safely in
port, and the captain's father was surprised to see his son return so
soon, and with such a splendid vessel.

Then he told all that had happened and his mother and wife, and
especially the old nurse, rejoiced greatly when they heard the good
news. As the king's minister was there to witness the truth of this
strange news, no one could doubt it. So the father and mother
consented to sell all their property and go to live in the king's
palace.

But the minister resolved to kill this new heir to the king and
husband of the princess who had been promised to him for wife; so,
when they had sailed a long distance, he called him on deck to confer
with him. The captain had a quiet conscience, and did not suspect any
evil, so he came up at once, and the minister caught him quickly and
threw him overboard.

The ship was sailing fast, and it was rather dark, so the captain
could not overtake her, but was left behind in the deep waters. The
minister, however, went quietly to sleep.

Fortunately the waves carried the king's young heir to a rock near the
shore; it was, however, a desert country, and no one was near to help
him. Those he had left on board the ship, seeing next morning that he
had disappeared, began to weep and wail, thinking he had fallen
overboard in the night and been drowned. His wife especially lamented
him, because they had loved each other very much. When the ship
arrived at the king's city, and reported to him the great disaster
that had befallen them, the king was troubled, and the whole court
mourned greatly. The king kept the parents and family of the young man
by him as he had engaged to do, but they could not console themselves
for their great loss.

Meanwhile, the king's unhappy son-in-law sat on the rock, and lived on
the moss which grew there, and was scorched by the hot sun, from which
he had no shelter; his garments were soiled and torn, and no one would
have recognised him. Still not a living soul was to be seen anywhere
to help him. At last, after fifteen days and fifteen nights, he
noticed an old man on the shore, leaning on a staff, and engaged in
fishing. Then the king's heir shouted to the old man, and begged him
to help him off the rock. The old fisherman consented--

'If you will pay me for it,' said he.

'How can I pay you when, as you see, I have nothing, and even my
clothes are only rags?' answered the young man sadly.

'Oh, that matters nothing,' exclaimed the old man; 'I have here pen
and paper, so, if you know how to use them, write a promise to give me
half of everything you may ever possess, and then sign the paper.'

To that the young man gladly consented; so the old man walked through
the water to him, and he signed the paper, and then the old man took
him over to the shore. After that he journeyed from village to
village, barefoot, hungry, and sorrowful, and begged some garments to
cover him.

After thirty days' wandering, his good luck led him to the city of the
king, and he went and sat at the door of the palace, wearing on his
finger his wedding-ring, on which was his own name and the name of his
wife. At eventide, the king's servants took him into the courtyard,
and gave him to eat what remained of their supper. Next morning he
took his stand by the garden-door, but the gardener came and drove him
away, saying that the king and his family were soon coming that way.
So he moved away a little, and sat down near a corner of the garden
and shortly afterward he saw the king walking with his mother, his
father leading the queen, and his wife walking with the minister, his
great enemy. He did not yet desire to show himself to them, but as
they passed near him and gave him alms, his wife saw the wedding-ring
on a finger of the hand which he held out to take the money. Still she
could not think the beggar could be her husband, so she said--

'Let me see the ring you have on your finger.'

The minister, who was walking by her, was a little frightened, and
said--

'Go on, how can you speak to that ragged beggar?'

But she would not hear him. She took the ring, and read thereon her
own and her husband's names. Her heart was greatly troubled by the
sight of the ring, but she controlled her feelings and said nothing.
As soon as they returned to the palace, she told the king, her father,
that she had recognised her husband's ring on the hand of the beggar
who sat by the side of the garden. 'So please send for him,' said she,
'that we may find out how the ring came into his hands.'

Then the king sent his servants to find the beggar, and they brought
him to the palace. And the king asked him whence he came, and how he
got that ring. Then he could no longer restrain himself, but told them
how he had been thrown overboard by the treacherous minister, and
spent fifteen days and nights on the naked rock, and how he had been
saved.

'You see now how God and my right-dealing have brought me back to my
parents and my wife.'

When they heard that, they could hardly speak, so rejoiced were they.
Then the king summoned the father and mother, and related what had
happened to their son.

The servants quickly brought him fine new garments, and bathed and
clothed him. Then for many days there was great rejoicings, not only
in the palace, but also in all the city, and he was crowned as king.
The minister was seized by the king's order, and given up to the
king's son-in-law, that he might punish him after his own will. But
the young king would not permit him to be put to death, but forgave
him, on condition that he left the kingdom instantly.

A few days after, the old man who had saved the young king came,
bringing with him his written promise. The young king took the paper,
and reading it, said--

'My old man, sit down. To-day I am king, but if I were a beggar I
would fulfil my word, and acknowledge my signature. Therefore we will
divide all that I have.'

So he took out the book and began to divide the cities.

'This is for me--that is for you.' So saying, he wrote all on a chart,
till all were divided between them, from the greatest city to the
poorest barrack.

The old man accepted his half, but immediately made a present of it
again to the young king, saying--

'Take it! I am not an old man, but an angel from God! I was sent by
God to save thee, for the sake of thy good deeds. Now reign and be
happy, and may thy prosperity last long.'

The angel disappeared; and the king reigned there in great happiness.




