HAWAII THE ORIGINAL HOME OF THE BROWNIES



Students of Hawaiian folk-lore find much of coincident interest with
traditional or more historic beliefs of other and older lands. The
same applies, in a measure, to some of the ancient customs of the
people. This is difficult to account for, more especially since the
Hawaiians possessed no written language by which such knowledge could
be preserved or transmitted. Fornander and others discovered in the
legends of this people traces of the story of the Flood, the standing
still of the sun, and other narratives of Bible history, which some
savants accept as evidence of their Aryan origin. This claim we are not
disposed to dispute, but desire to present another line of tradition
that has been neglected hitherto, yet has promise of much interest.

It will doubtless interest some readers to learn that Hawaii is the
real home of the Brownies, or was; and that this adventurous nomadic
tribe were known to the Hawaiians long before Swift's satirical mind
conceived his Lilliputians.

It would be unreasonable to expect so great a range of nationalities
and peculiar characteristics among the pygmies of Hawaii as among
the Brownies of story. Tradition naturally represents them as of one
race, and all nimble workers; not a gentleman dude, or policeman
in the whole lot. Unlike the inquisitive and mischievous athletes
of present fame, the original and genuine Brownies, known as the
Menehunes, are referred to as an industrious race. In fact, it was
their alleged power to perform a marvellous amount of labor in a
short space of time that has fixed them in the minds of Hawaiians,
many of whom point to certain traces of their work in various parts of
the islands to substantiate the traditional claim of their existence.

Meeting thus with occasional references to this active race, but
mostly in a vague way, it has been a matter of interesting inquiry
among Hawaiians, some of whom were noted _kaao_, or legend-bearers,
for further knowledge on the subject. Very naturally their ideas
differ respecting the Menehunes. Some treat the subject with
gravity and respect, and express the belief that they were the
original inhabitants of these islands, but gradually gave way to
the heavier-bodied ancestors of the present race; others consider
that the history of the race has been forgotten through the lapse of
ages; while the more intelligent and better educated look upon the
Menehunes as a mythical class of gnomes or dwarfs, and the account
of their exploits as having been handed down by tradition for social
entertainment, as other peoples relate fairy stories.

In the Hawaiian legend of Kumuhonua, Fornander states that the
Polynesians were designated as "the people, descendants from Menehune,
son of Lua Nuu, etc. It disappeared as a national name so long ago,
however, that subsequent legends have changed it to a term of reproach,
representing them at times as a separate race, and sometimes as a
race of dwarfs, skilful laborers, but artful and cunning."

In the following account and selection of stories gathered from various
native sources, as literal a rendition as possible has been observed
by the translators for the better insight it gives of Hawaiian thought
and character.



