AI KANAKA



On the leeward side of the island of Molokai, a little to the east of
Kaluaaha lies the beautiful valley of Mapulehu, at the mouth of which
is located the _heiau_, or temple, of Iliiliopae, which was erected
by direction of Ku-pa, the Moi, to look directly out upon the harbor
of Ai-Kanaka, now known as Pukoo. At the time of its construction,
centuries ago, Kupa was the _Moi_, or sovereign, of the district
embracing the _Ahupuaas_, or land divisions, of Mapulehu and Kaluaaha,
and he had his residence in this heiau which was built by him and
famed as the largest throughout the whole Hawaiian group.,

Kupa had a priest named Kamalo, who resided at Kaluaaha. This priest
had two boys, embodiments of mischief, who one day while the King
was absent on a fishing expedition, took the opportunity to visit his
house at the heiau. Finding there the _pahu kaeke_  belonging to
the temple, they commenced drumming on it.

Some evil-minded persons heard Kamalo's boys drumming on the Kaeke
and immediately went and told Kupa that the priest's children were
reviling him in the grossest manner on his own drum. This so enraged
the King that he ordered his servants to put them to death. Forthwith
they were seized and murdered; whereupon Kamalo, their father, set
about to secure revenge on the King.

Taking with him a black pig as a present, he started forth to enlist
the sympathy and services of the celebrated seer, or wizard, Lanikaula,
living some twelve miles distant at the eastern end of Molokai. On the
way thither, at the village of Honouli, Kamalo met a man the lower
half of whose body had been bitten off by a shark, and who promised
to avenge him provided he would slay some man and bring him the lower
half of his body to replace his own. But Kamalo, putting no credence
in such an offer, pressed on to the sacred grove of Lanikaula. Upon
arrival there Lanikaula listened to his grievances but could do
nothing for him. He directed him, however, to another prophet, named
Kaneakama, at the west end of the island, forty miles distant. Poor
Kamalo picked up his pig and travelled back again, past his own
home, down the coast to Palaau. Meeting with Kaneakama the prophet
directed him to the heiau of Puukahi, at the foot of the _pali_, or
precipice, of Kalaupapa, on the windward side of the island, where
he would find the priest Kahiwakaapuu, who was a _kahu_, or steward,
of Kauhuhu, the shark god. Once more the poor man shouldered his pig,
wended his way up the long ascent of the hills of Kalae to the pali of
Kalaupapa, descending which he presented himself before Kahiwakaapuu,
and pleaded his cause. He was again directed to go still farther along
the windward side of the island till he should come to the _Ana puhi_
(eel's cave), a singular cavern at sea level in the bold cliffs between
the valleys of Waikolu and Pelekunu, where Kauhuhu, the shark god,
dwelt, and to him he must apply. Upon this away went Kamalo and his
pig. Arriving at the cave, he found there Waka and Moo, two kahus
of the shark god. "Keep off! Keep off!" they shouted. "This place is
kapu. No man can enter here, on penalty of death."

"Death or life," answered he, "it is all the same to me if I can
only gain my revenge for my poor boys who have been killed." He then
related his story, and his wanderings, adding that he had come to
make his appeal to Kauhuhu and cared not for his own life.

"Well," said they to him, "Kauhuhu is away now fishing, but if he
finds you here when he returns, our lives as well as yours will pay
the forfeit. However, we will see what we can do to help you. We
must hide you hereabouts, somewhere, and when he returns trust to
circumstances to accomplish your purpose."

But they could find no place to hide him where he would be secure from
the search of the god, except the rubbish pile where the offal and
scrapings of taro were thrown. They therefore thrust him and his pig
into the rubbish heap and covered them over with the taro peelings,
enjoining him to keep perfectly still, and watch till he should see
eight heavy breakers roll in successively from the sea. He then would
know that Kauhuhu was returning from his fishing expedition.

Accordingly, after waiting a while, the eight heavy rollers appeared,
breaking successively against the rocks; and sure enough, as the eighth
dissolved into foam, the great shark god came ashore. Immediately
assuming human form, he began snuffing about the place, and addressing
Waka and Moo, his kahus, said to them, "There is a man here." They
strenuously denied the charge and protested against the possibility
of their allowing such a desecration of the premises. But he was
not satisfied. He insisted that there was a man somewhere about,
saying, "I smell him, and if I find him you are dead men; if not,
you escape." He examined the premises over and over again, never
suspecting the rubbish heap, and was about giving up the search when,
unfortunately, Kamalo's pig sent forth a squeal which revealed the
poor fellow's hiding-place.

Now came the dread moment. The enraged Kauhuhu seized Kamalo with
both hands and, lifting him up with the intention of swallowing him,
according to his shark instinct, had already inserted the victim's
head and shoulders into his mouth before he could speak.

"O Kauhuhu, before you eat me, hear my petition; then do as you like."

"Well for you that you spoke as you did," answered Kauhuhu, setting
him down again on the ground. "Now, what have you to say? Be quick
about it."

Kamalo then rehearsed his grievances and his travels in search for
revenge, and presented his pig to the god.

Compassion arose in the breast of Kauhuhu, and he said, "Had you come
for any other purpose I would have eaten you, but as your cause is
a sacred one I espouse it, and will revenge it on Kupa the King. You
must, however, do all that I tell you. Return to the heiau of Puukahi,
at the foot of the pali, and take the priest Kahiwakaapuu on your
back, and carry him up the pali over to the other side of the island,
all the way to your home at Kaluaaha. Erect a sacred fence all around
your dwelling-place, and surround it with the sacred flags of white
kapa. Collect black hogs by the _lau_ (four hundred), red fish by the
lau, white fowls by the lau, and bide my coming. Wait and watch till
you see a small cloud the size of a man's hand arise, white as snow,
over the island of Lanai. That cloud will enlarge as it makes its way
across the channel against the wind until it rests on the mountain
peaks of Molokai back of Mapulehu Valley. Then a rainbow will span
the valley from side to side, whereby you will know that I am there,
and that your time of revenge has come. Go now, and remember that
you are the only man who ever ventured into the sacred precincts of
the great Kauhuhu and returned alive."

Kamalo returned with a joyful heart and performed all that had
been commanded him. He built the sacred fence around his dwelling;
surrounded the inclosure with sacred flags of white kapa; gathered
together black hogs, red fish, and white fowls, each by the lau, as
directed, with other articles sacred to the gods, such as cocoanuts
and white kapas, and then sat himself down to watch for the promised
signs of his revenge. Day after day passed until they multiplied into
weeks, and the weeks began to run into months.

Finally, one day, the promised sign appeared. The snow white speck of
cloud, no bigger than a man's hand, arose over the mountains of Lanai
and made its way across the stormy channel in the face of the opposing
gale, increasing as it came, until it settled in a majestic mass on
the mountains at the head of Mapulehu Valley. Then appeared a splendid
rainbow, proudly overarching the valley, its ends resting on the high
lands on either side. The wind began to blow; the rain began to pour,
and shortly a furious storm came down the doomed valley, filling its
bed from side to side with a mad rushing torrent, which, sweeping
everything before it, spread out upon the belt of lowlands at the
mouth of the valley, overwhelming Kupa and all his people in one common
ruin, and washing them all into the sea, where they were devoured by
the sharks. All were destroyed except Kamalo and his family, who were
safe within their sacred inclosure, which the flood dared not touch,
though it spread terror and ruin on every side of them. Wherefore the
harbor of Pukoo, where this terrible event occurred, was long known
as _Ai Kanaka_ (man eater), and it has passed into a proverb among
the inhabitants of that region that "when the rainbow spans Mapulehu
Valley, then look out for the _Waiakoloa_,"--a furious storm of rain
and wind which sometimes comes suddenly down that valley.



