LAKA'S ADVENTURE


Wahieloa, a chief, lived at Kalaikoi, Kipahulu, Maui. He took to
him a wife named Hinahawea. In due time a boy was born to them, whom
Hinahowana, the mother of Hinahawea, brought up under her own care
at Alaenui. She called him Laka-a-wahieloa. He was greatly petted
by his parents. One day his father went to Hawaii in search of the
_Ala-Koiula a Kane_ for a toy for his son, landing at Punaluu, Kau,
Hawaii, where he was killed in a cave called Keana-a-Kaualehu.

After a long absence Laka asked for his father, and his mother referred
him to his grandmother, who, on being questioned, told him that his
father went to Hawaii, and was supposed to be dead. Laka then asked
for means by which he could search for his father.

His grandmother replied: "Go to the mountains and look for the tree
that has leaves shaped like the moon on the night of Hilo, or Hoaka;
such is the tree for a canoe."

Laka followed this advice, and went to the mountains to find the
tree for his canoe. Finding a suitable one, he commenced to cut
in the morning, and by sundown he had felled it to the ground. This
accomplished, he went home. Returning the next day, to his surprise he
could not find his fallen tree, so he cut down another, with the same
result. Laka was thus tricked for several days, and in his perplexity
consulted again with his grandmother, who sent him off with the same
advice as before, to look for the crescent-shaped leaf.

He went to the mountains again and found the desired tree, but before
cutting it he dug a big hole on the side where the Kalala-Kamahele
would fall. Upon cutting the tree it fell right into the hole or
trench, as designed; then he jumped into it and lay in waiting for
the person or persons who were reerecting the trees he had cut down
for his canoe.

While thus waiting, he heard some one talking about raising the tree
and returning it to its former position, followed by someone chanting
as follows:


                E ka mano o ke Akua,
                Ke kini o ke Akua,
                Ka lehu o ke Akua,
                Ka lalani Akua,
                Ka pukui Akua!
                E na Akua o ke kuahiwi nei,
                I ka mauna,
                I ke kualono,
                I ka manowai la-e,
                E-iho! 


When this appeal ended there was a hum and noise, and in a short
time (_manawa ole_) the place was filled with a band of people, who
endeavored to lift the tree; but it would not move. Laka then jumped
out from his place of hiding and caught hold of two of the men,
Mokuhalii and Kapaaikee, and threatened to kill them for raising
again the trees he had cut for his canoe. Mokuhalii then told Laka
that if they were killed, nobody would be able to make a canoe for
him, nor would anybody pull it to the beach, but if they were spared
they would willingly do it for him, provided Laka would first build
a big and long shed (_halau_) of sufficient size to hold the canoe,
and prepare sufficient food for the men. Laka gladly consenting,
released them and returned to his home and built a shed on the level
ground of Puhikau. Then he went up to the woods and saw the canoe,
ready and complete. The Menehunes told Laka that it would be brought
to the halau that night. At the dead of night the hum of the voices
of the Menehunes was heard; this was the commencement of the lifting
of the canoe. It was not dragged, but held up by hand. The second
hum of voices brought the canoe to Haloamekiei, at Pueo. And at the
third hum the canoe was carefully laid down in the halau. Food and
fish were there spread out for the workers, the _ha_ of the taro for
food, and the opae and oopu for fish. At dawn the Menehunes returned
to their home. Kuahalau was the name of the halau, the remains of
the foundation of which were to be seen a few years ago, but now it
is ploughed over. The hole dug by Laka still exists.



