KEKUPUA'S CANOE


Kakae, a chief, lived at Wahiawa, Kukaniloko, Waialua, Oahu. One day
his wife told him that she desired to go in search of her brother,
Kahanaiakeakua, who was supposed to be living at Tahiti. Kakae
thereupon ordered his man Kekupua to go into the woods and find
a suitable tree and make a canoe for his wife for this foreign
voyage. Kekupua, with a number of men under him, searched in the
forest belt of Wahiawa, Helemano, and Waoala, as also through the
woods of Koolau, without success. From Kahana they made a search
through the mountains till they came to Kilohana, in Kalihi Valley,
and from there to Waolani, in Nuuanu, where they slept in a cave. In
the dead of night they heard the hum as of human voices, but were
unable to discern any person, though the voices sounded close to
them. At dawn silence reigned again, and when the sun arose, lo,
and behold! there stood a large mound of stones, the setting of which
resembled that of a _heiau_, or temple, the remains of which are said
to be noticeable to this day.

Kekupua and his men returned to their chief and reported their
unsuccessful search for a suitable _koa_ (_Acacia koa_) tree for
the desired canoe, and related also the incident at Waolani. Kakae,
being a descendant of the Menehunes, knew immediately the authors of
the strange occurrence. He therefore instructed Kekupua to proceed to
Makaho and Kamakela and to stay there till the night of Kane, then go
up to Puunui and wait till hearing the hum and noise of the Menehunes,
which would be the signal of their finishing the canoe. And thus it
was; the Menehunes, having finished the canoe, were ready to pull
it to the sea. He directed them to look sharp, and two men would be
noticed holding the ropes at the _pu_ (or head) of the canoe. One of
them would leap from one side to the other; he was the director of the
work and was called _pale_. There would be some men farther behind,
holding the _kawelewele_, or guiding-ropes. They were the _kahunas_
that superintended the construction of the canoe. He reminded them
to remember these directions, and when they saw these men, to give
them orders and show them the course to take in pulling the canoe to
the sea.

Kekupua followed all these instructions faithfully. He waited
at Puunui till dusk, when he heard a hum as of many voices, and
proceeding farther up near the slope of Alewa he saw these wonderful
people. They were like ordinary human beings but diminutive. He
directed them to pull the canoe along the _nae_, or farther side of
the Puunui stream. By this course the canoe was brought down as far
as Kaalaa, near Waikahalulu, where, when daylight came, they left
their burden and returned to Waolani. The canoe was left in the ditch,
where it remained for many generations, and was called Kawa-a-Kekupua
(Kekupua's canoe), in honor of the servant of the chief Kakae.

Thus, even with the help of the Menehunes, the wife of Kakae was not
satisfied in her desire.



