Guleesh


There was once a boy in the County Mayo; Guleesh was his name. There
was the finest rath a little way off from the gable of the house, and
he was often in the habit of seating himself on the fine grass bank
that was running round it. One night he stood, half leaning against
the gable of the house, and looking up into the sky, and watching the
beautiful white moon over his head. After he had been standing that
way for a couple of hours, he said to himself: "My bitter grief that I
am not gone away out of this place altogether. I'd sooner be any place
in the world than here. Och, it's well for you, white moon," says he,
"that's turning round, turning round, as you please yourself, and no
man can put you back. I wish I was the same as you."

Hardly was the word out of his mouth when he heard a great noise
coming like the sound of many people running together, and talking,
and laughing, and making sport, and the sound went by him like a whirl
of wind, and he was listening to it going into the rath. "Musha, by my
soul," says he, "but ye're merry enough, and I'll follow ye."

What was in it but the fairy host, though he did not know at first
that it was they who were in it, but he followed them into the rath.
It's there he heard the _fulparnee_, and the _folpornee_, the
_rap-lay-hoota_, and the _roolya-boolya_, that they had there, and
every man of them crying out as loud as he could: "My horse, and
bridle, and saddle! My horse, and bridle, and saddle!"

"By my hand," said Guleesh, "my boy, that's not bad. I'll imitate ye,"
and he cried out as well as they: "My horse, and bridle, and saddle!
My horse, and bridle, and saddle!" And on the moment there was a fine
horse with a bridle of gold, and a saddle of silver, standing before
him. He leaped up on it, and the moment he was on its back he saw
clearly that the rath was full of horses, and of little people going
riding on them.

Said a man of them to him: "Are you coming with us to-night, Guleesh?"

"I am surely," said Guleesh.

"If you are, come along," said the little man, and out they went all
together, riding like the wind, faster than the fastest horse ever you
saw a-hunting, and faster than the fox and the hounds at his tail.

The cold winter's wind that was before them, they overtook her, and
the cold winter's wind that was behind them, she did not overtake
them. And stop nor stay of that full race, did they make none, until
they came to the brink of the sea.

Then every one of them said: "Hie over cap! Hie over cap!" and that
moment they were up in the air, and before Guleesh had time to
remember where he was they were down on dry land again, and were
going like the wind. At last they stood still, and a man of them said
to Guleesh: "Guleesh, do you know where you are now?"

"Not a know," says Guleesh.

"You're in France, Guleesh," said he. "The daughter of the king of
France is to be married to-night, the handsomest woman that the sun
ever saw, and we must do our best to bring her with us, if we're only
able to carry her off; and you must come with us that we may be able
to put the young girl up behind you on the horse, when we'll be
bringing her away, for it's not lawful for us to put her sitting
behind ourselves. But you're flesh and blood, and she can take a good
grip of you, so that she won't fall off the horse. Are you satisfied,
Guleesh, and will you do what we're telling you?"

"Why shouldn't I be satisfied?" said Guleesh. "I'm satisfied, surely,
and anything that ye will tell me to do I'll do it without doubt."

They got off their horses there, and a man of them said a word that
Guleesh did not understand, and on the moment they were lifted up, and
Guleesh found himself and his companions in the palace. There was a
great feast going on there, and there was not a nobleman or a
gentleman in the kingdom but was gathered there, dressed in silk and
satin, and gold and silver, and the night was as bright as the day
with all the lamps and candles that were lit, and Guleesh had to shut
his two eyes at the brightness. When he opened them again and looked
from him he thought he never saw anything as fine as all he saw
there. There were a hundred tables spread out, and their full of meat
and drink on each table of them, flesh-meat, and cakes and sweetmeats,
and wine and ale, and every drink that ever a man saw. The musicians
were at the two ends of the hall, and they were playing the sweetest
music that ever a man's ear heard, and there were young women and fine
youths in the middle of the hall, dancing and turning, and going round
so quickly and so lightly, that it put a _soorawn_ in Guleesh's head
to be looking at them. There were more there playing tricks, and more
making fun and laughing, for such a feast as there was that day had
not been in France for twenty years, because the old king had no
children alive but only the one daughter, and she was to be married to
the son of another king that night. Three days the feast was going on,
and the third night she was to be married, and that was the night that
Guleesh and the sheehogues came, hoping, if they could, to carry off
with them the king's young daughter.

Guleesh and his companions were standing together at the head of the
hall, where there was a fine altar dressed up, and two bishops behind
it waiting to marry the girl, as soon as the right time should come.
Now nobody could see the sheehogues, for they said a word as they came
in, that made them all invisible, as if they had not been in it at
all.

"Tell me which of them is the king's daughter," said Guleesh, when he
was becoming a little used to the noise and the light.

"Don't you see her there away from you?" said the little man that he
was talking to.

Guleesh looked where the little man was pointing with his finger, and
there he saw the loveliest woman that was, he thought, upon the ridge
of the world. The rose and the lily were fighting together in her
face, and one could not tell which of them got the victory. Her arms
and hands were like the lime, her mouth as red as a strawberry when it
is ripe, her foot was as small and as light as another one's hand, her
form was smooth and slender, and her hair was falling down from her
head in buckles of gold. Her garments and dress were woven with gold
and silver, and the bright stone that was in the ring on her hand was
as shining as the sun.

Guleesh was nearly blinded with all the loveliness and beauty that was
on her; but when he looked again, he saw that she was crying, and that
there was the trace of tears in her eyes. "It can't be," said Guleesh,
"that there's grief on her, when everybody round her is so full of
sport and merriment."

"Musha, then, she is grieved," said the little man; "for it's against
her own will she's marrying, and she has no love for the husband she
is to marry. The king was going to give her to him three years ago,
when she was only fifteen, but she said she was too young, and
requested him to leave her as she was yet. The king gave her a year's
grace, and when that year was up he gave her another year's grace, and
then another; but a week or a day he would not give her longer, and
she is eighteen years old to-night, and it's time for her to marry;
but, indeed," says he, and he crooked his mouth in an ugly
way--"indeed, it's no king's son she'll marry, if I can help it."

Guleesh pitied the handsome young lady greatly when he heard that, and
he was heart-broken to think that it would be necessary for her to
marry a man she did not like, or what was worse, to take a nasty
sheehogue for a husband. However, he did not say a word, though he
could not help giving many a curse to the ill-luck that was laid out
for himself, to be helping the people that were to snatch her away
from her home and from her father.

He began thinking, then, what it was he ought to do to save her, but
he could think of nothing. "Oh! if I could only give her some help and
relief," said he, "I wouldn't care whether I were alive or dead; but I
see nothing that I can do for her."

He was looking on when the king's son came up to her and asked her for
a kiss, but she turned her head away from him. Guleesh had double pity
for her then, when he saw the lad taking her by the soft white hand,
and drawing her out to dance. They went round in the dance near where
Guleesh was, and he could plainly see that there were tears in her
eyes.

When the dancing was over, the old king, her father, and her mother
the queen, came up and said that this was the right time to marry her,
that the bishop was ready, and it was time to put the wedding-ring on
her and give her to her husband.

The king took the youth by the hand, and the queen took her daughter,
and they went up together to the altar, with the lords and great
people following them.



He did not stand long till he returned back, and he thinking in his
own mind on all he saw and heard, and wondering whether there was
really an herb at his own door that would bring back the talk to the
king's daughter. "It can't be," says he to himself, "that they would
tell it to me, if there was any virtue in it; but perhaps the
sheehogue didn't observe himself when he let the word slip out of his
mouth. I'll search well as soon as the sun rises, whether there's any
plant growing beside the house except thistles and dockings."

He went home, and as tired as he was he did not sleep a wink until the
sun rose on the morrow. He got up then, and it was the first thing he
did to go out and search well through the grass round about the house,
trying could he get any herb that he did not recognise. And, indeed,
he was not long searching till he observed a large strange herb that
was growing up just by the gable of the house.

He went over to it, and observed it closely, and saw that there were
seven little branches coming out of the stalk, and seven leaves
growing on every brancheen of them; and that there was a white sap in
the leaves. "It's very wonderful," said he to himself, "that I never
noticed this herb before. If there's any virtue in an herb at all, it
ought to be in such a strange one as this."

He drew out his knife, cut the plant, and carried it into his own
house; stripped the leaves off it and cut up the stalk; and there came
a thick, white juice out of it, as there comes out of the sow-thistle
when it is bruised, except that the juice was more like oil.

He put it in a little pot and a little water in it, and laid it on the
fire until the water was boiling, and then he took a cup, filled it
half up with the juice, and put it to his own mouth. It came into his
head then that perhaps it was poison that was in it, and that the good
people were only tempting him that he might kill himself with that
trick, or put the girl to death without meaning it. He put down the
cup again, raised a couple of drops on the top of his finger, and put
it to his mouth. It was not bitter, and, indeed, had a sweet,
agreeable taste. He grew bolder then, and drank the full of a thimble
of it, and then as much again, and he never stopped till he had half
the cup drunk. He fell asleep after that, and did not wake till it was
night, and there was great hunger and great thirst on him.






