Brewery of Eggshells



When the princess seen that there was no fear of any one being kilt,
she was so divarted by the stew that Redhead was in, that she gave
another great laugh; and well become Tom, out he cried, "King of
Dublin, I have two halves of your daughter."

"Oh, halves or alls," says the king, "put away that divil of a wolf,
and we'll see about it."

So Tom put his flute in his pocket, and says he to the baste that was
sittin' on his currabingo ready to faint, "Walk off to your mountain,
my fine fellow, and live like a respectable baste; and if ever I find
you within seven miles of any town, I'll----"

He said no more, but spit in his fist, and gave a flourish of his
club. It was all the poor divil of a wolf wanted: he put his tail
between his legs, and took to his pumps without looking at man or
mortal, and neither sun, moon, nor stars ever saw him in sight of
Dublin again.

At dinner every one laughed but the foxy fellow; and sure enough he
was laying out how he'd settle poor Tom next day.

"Well, to be sure!" says he, "King of Dublin, you are in luck. There's
the Danes moidhering us to no end. Deuce run to Lusk wid 'em! and if
any one can save us from 'em, it is this gentleman with the goat-skin.
There is a flail hangin' on the collar-beam in hell, and neither Dane
nor devil can stand before it."

"So," says Tom to the king, "will you let me have the other half of
the princess if I bring you the flail?"

"No, no," says the princess; "I'd rather never be your wife than see
you in that danger."

But Redhead whispered and nudged Tom about how shabby it would look to
reneague the adventure. So he asked which way he was to go, and
Redhead directed him.

Well, he travelled and travelled, till he came in sight of the walls
of hell; and, bedad, before he knocked at the gates, he rubbed himself
over with the greenish ointment. When he knocked, a hundred little
imps popped their heads out through the bars, and axed him what he
wanted.

"I want to speak to the big divil of all," says Tom; "open the gate."

It wasn't long till the gate was thrune open, and the Ould Boy
received Tom with bows and scrapes, and axed his business.

"My business isn't much," says Tom. "I only came for the loan of that
flail that I see hanging on the collar-beam, for the king of Dublin to
give a thrashing to the Danes."

"Well," says the other, "the Danes is much better customers to me; but
since you walked so far I won't refuse. Hand that flail," says he to a
young imp; and he winked the far-off eye at the same time. So, while
some were barring the gates, the young devil climbed up, and took down
the flail that had the hand-staff and booltheen both made out of
red-hot iron. The little vagabond was grinning to think how it would
burn the hands o' Tom, but the dickens a burn it made on him, no more
nor if it was a good oak sapling.

