LYING FOR A WAGER


One day a father sent his son to the mill with corn to grind; but
before he went he recommended him not to grind it in the mill in which
he should happen to meet with a man named 'Beardless.'    'God bless you, Beardless,' said he.

'God bless you too, my son,' replied the man.

'Can I grind my corn here?' asked the boy.

'Why not?' responded Beardless; 'my corn will be soon ready, and you
can grind yours as long as you like.'

But the boy recollected his father's advice, and left the mill and
went to another. But Beardless took some corn, and hurried by a
shorter way, to the mill towards which the boy had gone, and reached
there before him, and put some of his corn into the mill to be ground.
When the boy arrived, he was greatly surprised to find Beardless
there, and so he went away from this and approached a third mill. But
Beardless hurried by a short cut, and reached this mill also before
the boy, and gave some of his corn to be ground. He did the same at a
fourth mill; so the boy got tired, and, thinking that he should find
Beardless in every mill, put down his sack, and resolved to grind in
this mill, although Beardless was there.

When the boy's corn came to be ground, Beardless said to him,
'Hearken, my son. Let us make a cake of your flour.'

The boy was thinking all the time of his father's words, but he could
not help himself. So he said, 'Very good, we will make one.'

Beardless got up and began to mix the flour with water, which the boy
brought him, and he kept mixing till all the corn was ground, and all
the flour made into a very large loaf. Then they made a fire, put the
bread to bake, and, when it was baked, took it and placed it against a
wall.

Then Beardless said, 'My son, listen to me. If we were to divide the
loaf between us, it would not be enough for either of us, so let us
tell each other some lies, and whoever tells the greatest lie shall
have the whole loaf for himself.'

The boy thought, 'I cannot now draw back, so I may as well do my best
and go on.' So he said aloud to Beardless, 'Very well, but you must
begin.'

Then Beardless told many different lies, and when he got quite tired
of lying, the boy said to him, 'Eh! my dear Beardless, if that is all
you know, it is not much. Only listen, and have patience a little,
whilst I tell you a real truth. In my _young_ days, when I was an
_old_ man, we had very many beehives, and it was my business every
morning to count them. Now I always counted the bees easily enough,
but I never could count the beehives. One morning, whilst counting the
bees, I saw that the best bee was missing, so I put a saddle on the
cock and mounted, and started in search of my bee. I traced it to the
sea-shore, and saw that it had gone over the sea, so I followed it.
When I got over, I saw that a man had caught my bee, and was ploughing
a field with it in which he was about to sow millet. I called to him,
"That is my bee! How did you get her?" And the man said, "Well,
brother, if it is yours, take it." And he gave me back my bee, and
also a sack full of millet. Then I put the sack on my back, and moved
the saddle from the cock to the bee. Then I mounted it, and led the
cock behind me, that he might rest a little. Whilst I was crossing the
sea, somehow one of the strings of the sack broke, and all the millet
fell into the water.

'When I had got over it was already night, so I dismounted and let the
bee loose to graze. The cock I fastened near me, and gave him some
hay; after that I lay down to sleep. When I awoke in the morning, I
found the wolves had killed my bee and eaten it up; and the honey was
lying all about the valley ankle-deep; and on the hills it lay
knee-deep. Then I began to think in what I could gather up all the
honey. I remembered I had a little axe by me, so I went into the
forest to try to kill some beast, in order to make a sack from its
skin. In the forest I saw two deer dancing on one leg; so I broke the
leg with my little axe and caught them both. From the two deer I drew
three skins and made three bags, wherein I gathered up all the honey.
I put the sacks full of honey on the cock's back, and hastened home.
When I reached home I found that my father had just been born, and
they sent me to heaven to bring some holy water. Whilst I was thinking
how I should go up to heaven, I remembered the millet which had fallen
into the sea. When I reached the sea I found the millet had grown up
quite to heaven, so I climbed it and reached the sky. And on getting
into heaven I saw the millet was quite ripe, and that one whom I met
there had reaped it, and had already made a loaf from it, and had
broken some pieces into warm milk, which he was eating. I greeted him,
saying, "God help you!" and he answered, "God help thee also!" and
then he gave me holy water and I returned. But I found that meanwhile
there had been a great rain, so that the sea had risen and carried
away my millet. Then I grew very anxious as to how I should get down
again to earth. At last I remembered that I have long hair, so long
that when I stand upright it reaches down to the ground, and when I
sit it reaches to my ears; so I took my knife and cut one hair after
another, and tied them together as I went down them. Meanwhile it grew
dark, so I tied a knot in the hair, and resolved to rest on that knot
through the night. But how should I do without a fire? The tinder-box
I had by me, but I had no wood! Then I remembered I had somewhere in
my overcoat a sewing-needle, so I found it, cut it in pieces and made
a great fire, and when I was well warmed laid myself down near the
fire to sleep. I slept soundly, but, unfortunately, a spark of fire
burnt the hair through, and so head over heels I fell to the ground,
and sank into the earth up to my girdle. I looked about to see how I
could get out, and, seeing no help near, I hurried home for a spade
and came back and dug myself out. Then I took the holy water to my
father. When I arrived at home I found the reapers working in the
corn-field. The corn was so high, that the reapers were almost burnt
up. Then I shouted to them, "Why do you not bring our mare here which
is two days' long and a day and a half broad, and on whose back large
trees are growing? Bring her that she may make a little shadow on the
field!" My father quickly brought the mare, and the reapers worked on
quite pleasantly in her shadow. Then I took a vessel to bring some
water. But the water was frozen, so I took my head and broke the ice
with it. Then I filled the vessel with water, and carried it to the
reapers. When they saw me they all shouted, "But where is your head?"
I put up my hand to feel for my head, and found, alas, that I had no
head on my shoulders. I had forgotten it, and had left it by the
water. So I returned quickly, but a fox had got there before me, and
was drawing the brains from my head to eat. Then I approached slowly
and struck the fox furiously, and he began to run, and, in running,
dropped a little book from his pocket. I opened the book, and there I
read, "The whole loaf is for me, and Beardless is to get nothing!"' So
the boy caught up the loaf and ran off home, and Beardless remained
looking after him.




