THE WISE GIRL


Once upon a time a poor man lived in a small and mean cottage. He
possessed nothing in the world except a daughter who was very wise
indeed. She taught her father how to beg, and how to speak wisely. One
day the poor man went to the king to beg, and the king asked him
whence he came, and who had taught him to speak so well.

He told the king where he lived, and that he had a daughter who told
him what to say.

'And who taught your daughter all this wisdom?' demanded the king. The
poor man answered, 'God and our poverty have made her wise.'

Then the king gave him thirty eggs and said, 'Take these eggs to your
daughter, and tell her that if she bring forth chickens from the eggs,
I will make her rich presents; but if she fails, then I will have you
tortured.'

The poor man went back to his cottage weeping, and told all this to
his daughter. The girl saw at once that the eggs which the king had
sent had been boiled, but she told her father to go to sleep quietly,
and she would take care for everything. The father did as she said,
and, whilst he slept, she took a pot, filled it with water and beans,
and boiled them.

Next morning she told her father to take a plough and oxen, and go to
plough in a wood near to which the king would pass. 'When you see the
king coming,' said she, 'take a handful of beans, and begin to sow,
shouting, "Go on, my oxen, and God grant that the boiled beans may
bear fruit!" When the king asks you, "How can you expect boiled beans
to grow?" answer him, "Just as much as from boiled eggs to hatch
chickens!"'

The poor man listened to his daughter, and went to plough. When the
king came near, he began to shout, 'Ho ho, my oxen! go on! and God
grant that these boiled beans may bring me a good crop!'

The king, hearing these words, stopped his carriage, and said to the
poor man, 'Poor fellow, how can boiled beans bear a crop?'

'Just as well as boiled eggs can bring forth chickens,' answered the
man.

The king saw that his daughter had taught him what to say, and he
ordered his servants to bring the man before him. Then the king gave
him a bunch of flax, saying, 'Take this, and make from it all the
sails a ship needs. If you do not, you shall lose your life.'

The poor man took the bunch of flax with great fear, and returned
weeping to the cottage to tell his daughter, who bade him go to sleep
quietly. Next morning she gave him a small piece of wood, and told him
to take it to the king and demand that, from this piece of wood, all
the tools needful for spinning and weaving should be made. 'Then,'
continued she, 'I will make all that he has ordered me.'

The king was surprised, and considered a moment what to do. At last he
said, 'Take this little glass to your daughter, and tell her she must
empty the sea with it, so that dry land shall be where the water now
is.'

The poor man took the little cup to his daughter, and, weeping, told
her all the king required. The girl bade him be quiet till morning,
and then she would do all that was needed. Next morning she called her
father, gave him a pound of tow, and said, 'Take this to the king, and
tell him that with this tow he must first stop all the sources of the
rivers and lakes, and then I will dry up the sea.'

So the poor man went to the king and told him what his daughter had
said.

The king, seeing that the girl was wiser than himself, ordered that
she should be brought before him. When she bent before the king, he
said, 'Guess, maiden! what can be heard at the greatest distance?'

The girl answered, 'Your majesty, the thunder and the lie can be heard
at the greatest distance.'

Then the king grasped his beard, and, turning to his courtiers, put to
them the question, 'Guess what my beard is worth?' Some of them said
so much, others again so much; but the girl observed to the king that
none of the courtiers had guessed right, and said, 'The king's beard
is worth as much as three summer rains.' The king, greatly astonished,
said, 'It is so; the girl has guessed rightly!' Then he asked her if
she were willing to be his wife; and added that, if she were willing,
he would marry her.

The girl bent low and said, 'Let it be as your majesty commands! But I
pray you write with your hand on a scrap of paper this promise, that
if you should ever be displeased with me, and should send me away from
you, I shall be allowed to take with me from the palace any one thing
which I like best.'

The king consented, and gave the promise.

After they had lived happily together for some time, one day the king
was angry, and said to his wife, 'I will not have you any longer for
my wife, and I bid you leave the palace!'

The queen answered, 'I will obey your majesty, but permit me to pass
one night more in the palace. To-morrow I will go.'

This, the king could not well refuse.

That evening, at supper, the queen mixed something with the wine, and
offered it to the king to drink, saying, 'Be of good cheer, O king!
To-morrow we shall separate and, believe me, I shall be happier than I
was when I first met you.'

The king drank, and soon after fell asleep. Then the queen ordered her
carriage, and carried the king away with her to the cottage.

Next morning, when the king awoke in the cottage and saw where he
was, he exclaimed, 'Who brought me here?'

The queen answered, 'I brought you.'

Then the king asked, 'How have you dared to do so? Did I not tell you
I will not have you any longer for my wife?'

But the queen took out the king's written promise, and said, 'Yes,
indeed, you told me so; but see, you have written and promised that I
"shall be allowed to take with me from the palace that which I like
best, whenever I must leave the court."'

The king, seeing the paper, kissed his wife, and returned with her to
the palace.




