THE LEGEND OF ST GEORGE


Once upon a time all the saints assembled in order to divide amongst
themselves the treasures of the world. And, in this division, each
saint obtained something which satisfied him.

The beautiful summer, with all its wealth of flowers, fell to the lot
of St. George: to St. Elias fell the clouds and the thunder; and to
St. Pantelija the tempest. St. Peter obtained the keys of heaven: to
St. Nicholas fell the seas, and the ships upon them; and to the
Archangel Michael fell the right of gathering and guarding the souls
of the dying. St. John was chosen to preside over friendship and
'_koom-ship_,'        About a year had passed away since the saints had thus divided amongst
themselves the treasures of the world, when one day the holy Lady Mary
entered the assembly, evidently greatly afflicted, and with large
tears falling over her white cheeks. She greeted '_in the name of
God!_' her brethren the saints, and these gave her back her greeting.
Then St. Elias addressed her, saying, '_Our_ sister, holy Mary,
wherefore are you grieving? Why are you shedding these tears? You are,
perhaps, dissatisfied with the lot which fell to you when we divided
the treasures?'

But the holy Mary answered, 'My brethren, ye who are the righteousness
of God, when you divided the treasures you gave me also a share
therein, and therewith I am satisfied. Yet I have good cause,
nevertheless, to be sorely grieved. I come but now from the city of
the Troyan, and I have been unable to bring it to peace and the true
faith. There the young people do not reverence their elders--there the
brother challenges his own brother to mortal combat,--there the _koom_
is pursuing his _koom_ in the law courts,--there the brother
intermarries with his own sister, and the _koom_ with his
_kooma_,--there the holy Sabbath is violated, and, worst of all, there
they do not pray to the true God. The people have made to themselves a
god of silver, and to this idol do they pray. Now, what can I do, my
dear brethren, except to pray that the true God should send his
lightnings from heaven to destroy the fortress and fortifications,
and to burn down the cities and villages? Then, perhaps, the people of
the Troyan country may come to see the great wickedness and repent.'

St. Elias said to her these words, 'Our sister, holy Mary, do not do
this thing! Rather let us all pray God to allow us to give some
warning to the people--that He orders snow to fall on Mitrovdan, and
remain until St. George's day;        All the saints approved the proposal of St. Elias, and acted as he had
said. Then a great snow fell on Mitrovdan, and remained until St.
George's day, and a second snowfall came on St. George's day, and lay
on the earth until Mitrovdan. No seed could be sown, therefore, and no
lambs could be reared. The people suffered greatly throughout the
year; they would not, however, repent and mend their ways. Some of
them had part of last year's corn in their garners, and shiploads of
grain were brought from countries beyond the seas, and so they got
somehow through the year, and went on living just as wickedly as
before.

The holy Mary, seeing this, went a second time to the assembled
saints weeping. After the exchange of the customary greeting, St.
Elias asked her what was the reason of her tears, and she told him
that she was sorely grieved because the people of the Troyan country,
notwithstanding the chastisement they had suffered, still continued
living in wickedness. Then the saints resolved to send down a second
warning. So they prayed God to send down the curse of the small-pox.
Thereupon the small-pox appeared amongst the Troyans, and raged in
their country for three full years, carrying off all the strength and
beauty of the people, so that only the old remained to cough, and the
little babes to cry.

But, when the children grew up, they behaved just as their parents had
done, and neither improved nor repented. Weeping bitter tears over her
white cheeks, the holy Mary went the third time to the assembly of the
saints, and reported how disorderly and madly the people of the Troyan
land were still living. She said, it was quite evident that they could
not be brought to repentance, and that, therefore, she intended now to
pray God to send down his lightnings and destroy the cities and
villages.

But St. Elias said again, 'Not so, my dear sister! not so! Let us give
them yet a third warning.' So the saints prayed to God for the third
warning, and God granted their request.

Next morning, close by the king's palace in the chief city of the
Troyans a green lake appeared, and therein was an insatiable dragon
feeding on young men and maidens. Every morning, for breakfast, the
monster required a young man who had never been wedded; and every
evening, for supper, he demanded a youthful and blooming maiden.

This went on for seven years, until, at length, the turn came to the
only daughter of the king. Then the queen cried loudly and bitterly,
and clasped her arms closely round the neck of her child. Mother and
daughter wept together three days, and when the fourth day dawned, the
queen fell into a light slumber by her daughter's side. As she slept,
she dreamed that a man appeared to her, and said, 'O queen of the
Troyan city! do not send your daughter this evening to the lake; but
send her to-morrow, when the day dawns, and the sun shines. Tell her,
when she goes to the lake, she must bathe her face, and then, turning
towards the east, let her call on the name of the true God. She must,
however, be careful not to mention the idol of silver. This done, she
must wait patiently, ready to accept whatsoever the true God ordereth
for her.'

The queen, awakening from her sleep, related at once her dream to her
daughter, and impressed on her the necessity of carrying out
faithfully her instructions. Weeping bitterly, the king's daughter
took leave of her mother at daybreak, begging the queen to forgive her
the milk with which she had been nourished in her babyhood. Then she
went down to the lake shore, bathed her face, and, turning eastwards,
prayed to the true God. This done, according to her mother's
instructions, she sat down and awaited whatever might happen to her.

Suddenly there appeared a strange knight mounted on a magnificent
charger. He greeted the maiden 'in the name of God!' and she,
springing up quickly, returned the greeting courteously. Then the
strange knight, seeing she had been weeping, asked what it was that
troubled her, and wherefore she sat waiting there alone. In answer to
these questions the maiden related the whole sad story of the dragon,
and the fearful fate which seemed to await her.

When she had finished her narration, the knight dismounted, and,
removing his kalpak from his head, said, 'Now I desire to sleep a
little, and I wish you to pass your hand through my hair that I may
sleep more pleasantly.' The girl tried to dissuade him from this, lest
the dragon should come whilst he slept, and devour him also. She said
it would be a pity for him to perish thus needlessly. However, she
could not prevail on him to abandon his purpose, and he fell at once
into a gentle slumber, and slept as quietly as a young lamb.

Very soon, however, the waters of the lake were agitated, and the
terrible dragon appeared coming towards them. Then the unknown knight
sprang up quickly into his saddle, and, stretching out his arms,
lifted the maiden up and placed her behind him on his charger. This
done, with one stroke of his lance, he pinned the dragon down to the
bottom of the lake, where it remained bleeding, but not dead. Then
the knight took the girl back to the palace of the king, her father,
and the queen, who had been watching anxiously everything that passed,
met him at the gate and delivered up to him the keys of the city.

The knight, who was no other than St. George, now walked through the
streets of the Troyan city, and, having gathered the people around
him, spoke to them thus, 'Listen to me, my children! Pray no more to
the idol of silver, pray only to the one true God! And you, young
people, reverence your elders. All of you remember that near relatives
cannot be permitted to intermarry. Keep holy the Sabbath, as well as
all the other holy days and saint days.' Having thus admonished them,
the holy knight ordered that the temple should be opened, and when his
commands had been obeyed, he took out of it the silver idol, and
melted it into a variety of ornaments. In the place of the silver idol
he placed a holy picture, and then consecrated the temple, and it
became a church. When this was done, he turned again to the people,
and said, 'If you will promise to do as I have told you, I will kill
the dragon in the lake; but if you refuse to do what I have asked of
you I will let him loose again, and I think he will soon make an end
of you.'

Then all the people bowed themselves to the earth before the holy
knight, and shouted aloud, 'O good and unknown knight! our brother in
God! Deliver us from the dragon in the lake, and we will do and live
just as you have counselled us!' Whereupon they received the true
faith. When they had so done, St. George returned to the lake, and
made the sign of the cross over it with a stick, and at that very
moment both the lake and dragon disappeared as if they had never been.

Having done all this, St. George went back to the heavenly kingdom to
recount to the saints there assembled the conversion of the Troyan
people.

