THE SHEPHERD AND THE KING'S DAUGHTER


A long time ago there lived a poor woman who possessed nothing in the
world except one son and four lambs. The boy took the lambs out to
graze every morning, and brought them home every night. One day it
happened that the lambs were grazing in a field not far from the
summer palace of the king, and the king's daughter came out to the
young shepherd and asked him to give her one of them. The boy refused,
saying, 'I cannot give you one, for my mother will scold me if I do,
as we have nothing in the world except these four lambs.' The
princess, however, had taken so great a fancy for a lamb that she
would not be refused, and at last said, 'Only let me have this one and
I will give you any price you like to ask.'

The boy, seeing that the princess would not go away without a lamb,
considered a little how he could get rid of her, and then he told her
that he would give her one if she would show him one of her shoulders.
To his great surprise the princess, without any hesitation, pushed her
mantle aside and showed him her bare white arm, and he noticed that on
the shoulder there was a mark like a star. He was obliged now to give
her one of his lambs, and when he went home in the evening he told his
mother that he had fallen asleep at noon, and that when he awoke, one
of the lambs had vanished, and he could not find it anywhere.

Then his mother scolded him very much, saying, 'I see you will bring
me to the beggar's staff with your carelessness! To-morrow you must
take these three lambs out to graze very early, and look well about
for the lost one. And if you don't find it you had better never let me
set eyes on you again.'

At dawn the next day the boy took the three lambs to graze in the same
field, and sat down to consider how he could get back the lamb he had
lost. At noon, when no one was about, the king's daughter came out of
the palace and said to him, 'Young shepherd, give me another lamb, and
ask what you please in return.' But the boy answered, 'No! I dare not
give you another; I have suffered enough for the one I gave you
yesterday! So please go and bring me my lamb back.'

This the princess refused to do, and said, 'It is quite useless to
speak of such a thing. But tell me, did you notice anything particular
on my shoulder?'

The youth answered, 'Yes, I saw a star!'

'Ah!' exclaimed the princess; 'for that you can never pay me enough,
and yet you want your lamb back!' So they almost quarrelled, for the
king's daughter persisted in begging him to give her another lamb, and
the young shepherd insisted that she should bring him the first one
back again.

At last, seeing there was no end to her begging, the boy said, 'Well!
I will give you one if you uncover before me your other shoulder.'
This the princess did instantly, and he remarked that she had the mark
of a star on that arm also. In this way he lost a second lamb; and
when the evening came he went home very sadly, feeling sure his mother
would scold him. And so she did, far more than at the first time,
calling him ill names and threatening to beat him. The boy was really
sorry that he had given way to the princess's prayers, but he could
not help it now. Next day, again, the princess came to him and begged
so hard and so long for a third lamb that he became impatient, and,
thinking to shame her, said he would give her one if she showed him
her neck. To his great surprise, however, the king's daughter at once
let her mantle fall, and he saw that she had the mark of a crescent on
her throat. So the poor boy lost a third lamb, and hardly dared go
home to his mother at night with the one lamb left them. Indeed the
poor old woman was so angry at her son's carelessness in losing one
lamb after another whilst he slept--for he did not dare to tell her
the truth about the princess--that she cursed him as 'a
good-for-nothing who would bring her to beggary.'

Notwithstanding all his mother's reproaches and threats the boy could
not refuse the princess the next day when she came out to ask for the
fourth lamb. However, he tried to get her to go away a long time, and
not until quite tired out with her begging, did he exclaim, 'Well, I
will give you the lamb if you will show me your breast!' Then the
princess pushed her robe aside, and the boy noticed that she had the
mark of a sun on her bosom.

In this way the young shepherd lost all the four lambs, and he lived a
long time with his mother in great poverty.

A long, long time afterwards the king sent out a proclamation that he
intended to let his daughter marry, and would give her to that man who
could tell him what particular birth-marks she had about her. The
young shepherd heard this proclamation, and when he went home in the
evening he said to his mother, 'Mother, I intend to go to the king's
palace to-morrow, so get me my best linen ready.'

'And what do _you_ want in the king's palace?' asked the poor old
woman wondering.

'I intend, God helping me, to marry the king's daughter,' replied the
young man boldly.

'Oh! you had better give up that fancy,' cried the mother. 'It will be
better for you to go and work and gain a piaster than to go, like a
fly without a head, dreaming about things that are as high as the sky
above you.'

But the young man would not be persuaded, and went the next day to the
king's palace. Before going out of the hut, however, he said to his
anxious old mother, 'Good-bye, mother.'

He had not walked very far before a gipsy met him, and asked, 'Where
are you going, my young man?'

'I am going to the king's palace,' answered the youth, 'and I mean,
God helping me, to marry the king's daughter.'

'But, my dear comrade,' said the gipsy, keeping near him, 'how can you
really expect that she will marry you, when you are so poor? Only a
shepherd!'

'Eh!' returned the young man; 'but I know what birth-marks she has,
and the king has sent out a proclamation that whoever guesses these
shall have her for his wife.'

'If it is so,' rejoined the cunning gipsy, 'I myself will also go to
the palace with you.'

The young man was glad to have company on the road, and so he and the
gipsy travelled on together until they came to the residence of the
king.

When they came to the palace they found a large number of people who
had come to 'try their luck,' and guess what birth-marks the princess
had. But it was lost time, for every one of them, after going past the
king and guessing 'by good luck' at the marks of the princess, was
obliged to go away, having lost his time and gained nothing. At length
the turn came for the young shepherd to pass before the king, and the
gipsy kept close to him to hear what he would say.

So the youth stepped before the king and said, 'The princess has a
star on each shoulder, and a crescent on the throat----'

At this moment the gipsy shouted loudly, 'Look there! that is just
what I was going to say!'

'Be quiet!' said the young shepherd; 'or, if you really know what
other marks she has, speak out.'

'No, no!' cried the gipsy, 'go on, go on! When _you_ have done, _I_
will speak what I know!'

Then the youth turned again to the king and continued, 'The princess
has the mark of a sun on her bosom----'

'That is exactly what I was going to say!' cried the gipsy, coming up
quickly; 'she has the mark of a sun on her breast.'

Now the king was exceeding surprised, and confessed to his counsellors
that the young shepherd had really guessed the truth. But as neither
the king nor the counsellors at all liked the idea of the princess
marrying a poor shepherd, they consulted how they could get rid of him
without giving the lie to the king's proclamation. At length it was
decided that his Majesty should say, 'As both the shepherd and the
gipsy have guessed the princess's birth-marks, I cannot justly decide
which of them should marry her. But I will give to each of them
seventy piasters, and they must both go and trade with this money for
a year. At the end of the year, that one which brings back the most
money shall have the princess for his wife.'

The young shepherd and the gipsy, having received the money, went off
in opposite directions to seek their fortunes.

After having travelled about some time, like a fly without a head, not
knowing where--the shepherd stopped one night to rest in the hut of an
old woman, who was even poorer than his own mother.

As he sat with the old woman in the hut that evening, the lad thought
he might just as well ask her advice as to the best way to invest his
capital of seventy piasters, so he said: 'I have seventy piasters to
trade with, can you tell me some good way in which I may employ them
profitably?'

The old woman considered the matter for some time before she answered,
and then said, 'To-morrow is market-day in the next city; go there
yourself, and when a man brings a very poor cow for sale, go up and
try to buy it. The cow will be of many different colours, but very
thin and ill fed, but you must buy her at whatever price the man asks
for her. When you have bought her, bring her here at once.'

The young man agreed to follow the old woman's counsel, and so next
day he went to the city and really found there a man who had brought a
poor, but variously coloured, cow to sell. Many people wished to buy
the cow, but the young man outbid them all, and at length offered all
his seventy piasters for her. So he got the cow, and drove it to the
hut where he had passed the night. When the old woman came out to see
who was coming, he called out to her, 'Now, my old mother, I have
bought the cow, and what shall we do with her? She has cost me all my
capital!'

The old woman answered at once, 'Kill the cow, my son, and cut it in
pieces.'

'But how will that bring me back my money with profit?' asked the
young shepherd, hesitating whether he should follow her advice or no.

'Don't be afraid, my son, but do as I say,' returned the old woman.
Accordingly he did as she advised him, killed the cow and cut her into
pieces. This done, he asked again, 'And now, what shall I do?' The old
woman said quietly, 'Well, now we will eat the meat, and the suet we
will melt down and put into a pot to keep for some other occasion.'

The shepherd did not at all like this proposal, for he could not see
what return he could hope to get for such an investment of his
capital. However, he thought within himself, 'Well, since I have been
foolish enough to follow her counsel on the two former occasions, I
may as well follow it also this third time.' So he remained with the
old woman many days, until the last piece of meat had been eaten up.
When, however, he thought over all that had happened, he grew very
sad, and, seeing no sign of anything better, said one morning to the
old woman reproachfully, 'Now you see by following your counsel I have
spent all the king's money, and am now a ruined man!'

'Don't be afraid, my son,' said the old woman; 'you can now take that
pot of suet with you and go to the black world, where all the people
are black as chimney-pots, and there you can sell for a good deal of
money your suet, for it has the power to make the black skin white.'

The poor shepherd was very glad at hearing this, and next morning took
the pot of suet on his shoulder and started on his journey. After he
had travelled many, many days, he came to a strange-looking country,
and, going a little farther, he saw a man who was quite black, just
as the old woman had said--as black as a chimney-pot. He was
immediately going to offer to sell some of his fat to the black man,
when the latter, frightened at the sight of a white man, ran away.
Many other black men who saw him did the same, but after a while, when
they saw that he went on quietly carrying his pot on his shoulder,
they took courage, and came to him one by one, until at last quite a
large crowd had gathered about him. At length, one of them ventured to
say to him, 'You strange-looking man, tell us who you are, and where
you come from, and why did you come here?' The shepherd answered, 'I
am a white man from a white world, and I come to bring you some fat
which will make you also white--that is, of course, if you choose to
buy it from me and pay me for it well.'

Now the black men, though they had been quite shocked at first to see
the white man, began to think they also would like to be white; so
they said they were willing to pay him as much as he liked to ask for
his wonderful fat, because they were very rich.

However, they doubted a little if the fat would really make them white
as he said, and wished to see it tried before they bought it.
Thereupon he set the pot on the ground, and walked round and round it,
saying some queer words as if he were charming it. Then he took out of
the pot a little of the fat, and with it smeared one of the black men.
In a moment the black skin became quite white, and the other blacks,
seeing that he had told them the truth, crowded eagerly round him,
begging that he would make them white also, and outbidding each other
in offers of money, provided only that he made them white in a short
time. The young shepherd worked hard, smearing one black skin after
the other, until he got quite weary and had become very rich, for they
gave him a good deal of money, and there were a great many of them who
wished to be made white.

Just as he had thus whitened the last of the black men about him, one
of them said to him, 'Wonder-working man! We have a king who, being
our chief, is the blackest of us all; therefore, if you think you can
make him white also, we are sure he will be very glad to get rid of
his blackness, and will pay you more money than you ever dreamt of.'

'I will do it very gladly,' answered the shepherd; 'for you must know
I am doing this not so much for the sake of money as for charity;
only, show me at once the way to your king.'

So they all ran off before him to show him the way, and he followed
them carrying his pot on his shoulder.

When they arrived at the door of the king's palace, one of the men
said to him, 'Wait a moment here, whilst I go and tell his Majesty all
about your wonderful fat, and ask him to receive you.' The shepherd
waited quietly, though crowds gathered round him to stare at him and
his great pot, until the man came back and said the king was waiting
impatiently to see him. So he lifted his pot again on his
shoulder--for he had set it down that he might rest the better--and
followed the messenger to the king's presence.

Now the king of the black men was far blacker than anything the
shepherd had ever seen in his life; he had no doubt, however, after
all he had seen, but that his fat would whiten him also. So he said
cheerfully, 'Good morning, your Majesty!' 'Good morning, my dear
fellow,' returned the black king; 'I have heard that you can do
wonders, and I have seen that you have already whitened many of my
subjects, so, for Heaven's sake, deliver me also from this my
blackness, and ask in return whatever you like, even the half of my
kingdom!'

'What your Majesty has heard is quite true,' said the shepherd; 'and I
will very gladly try to make you also white!' and he took a great lump
of fat and rubbed it well all over the king's face and neck. In a
moment the king became as white as snow, to the great rejoicings of
all his people. But no one was so pleased as the king himself, so he
said again, 'Only ask! I will give you whatever you wish, even if it
be my throne!'

'I thank your Majesty very humbly for offering me your throne, but I
don't want it,' replied the shepherd; 'but if you will give me three
ships full of gold and silver, and some good sailors to manage the
ships, and some good soldiers and cannons to defend them against the
pirates, I shall think myself more than repaid, and I will send you
back the ships and cannons when the gold and silver are landed safely
in my country.'

Then the king at once gave the necessary orders, and in a very few
days his servants came to report to him, that the ships were then
filled with gold and silver, and that the cannons were ready loaded
and posted for action, and all the sailors and soldiers prepared to
fight if any sea-robber came in their way.

Then the young shepherd took a courteous leave of the king, and of all
those other people who were so thankful to him for having changed them
from black men into white ones. He now went on board one of the ships,
very glad to go back to his own country, and the two other ships full
of gold and silver followed the first one across the seas.

After having sailed a long time the three ships reached at last the
coast of the kingdom where the king was waiting, daily expecting the
return of the gipsy and shepherd to claim his daughter. The shepherd
let his ships lay quietly in the harbour one day, and then, noticing
much tumult and disturbance in the city, went ashore to see what had
happened. There he found a great crowd, and on asking some of the
people what they were going to do, they told him that they were going
to hang a gipsy who had come to the city with seventy piasters
capital, and who had not only spent all his money in drinking and
revellings, but had even got into debt for seventy other piasters,
which he was quite unable to pay, and that this was the reason they
were about to hang him. In a few moments the hangman appeared, leading
the gipsy, who was no other than the very man who had tried to cheat
the shepherd out of the princess.

The young shepherd recognised his rival at once, and, going near him,
said, 'What is this, my old friend? Have you really come to this?'
The instant the gipsy saw the shepherd he stopped and began to whine
and wail, begging him to save him from the gibbet, and he would be his
faithful servant all his life. 'As for the princess,' he added
cunningly, 'I have given her up a long time ago, and don't care for
anything if only my life is spared.'

Then the young shepherd was sorry for the poor trembling, whining
wretch, and offered to pay the debt for the gipsy if the people would
let him off. So they agreed to this, and the young man not only paid
the seventy piasters the gipsy owed, but bought him besides a suit of
good clothes as well as a carriage and a pair of fine horses. Then he
left him and went back to his ships, and they sailed on slowly along
the coast towards the king's residence.

Now when the gipsy had dressed himself out smartly in his fine new
clothes, he got into his carriage and drove off quickly to the king's
palace. Arrived there, he left his carriage and horses in the
courtyard, and went at once to the presence of the king, whom he
addressed thus: 'Your Majesty knows it is not yet quite a year since
you gave me seventy piasters to trade with, and see! I come back
already handsomely dressed, and have a fine carriage with a pair of
beautiful horses below in the yard. As for the young shepherd, I have
heard that he has not only spent all your Majesty's money in rioting,
but that he had also got in debt, for which he has been hung. So it is
no use waiting for him! Let us keep my wedding at once!'

The king did not fancy the gipsy for his son-in-law, and was thinking
what he could say to put him off a little time, when, looking by
chance through his window, he saw three strange-looking ships sailing
slowly towards the shore. At this he exclaimed, 'I see some foreign
visitors are coming to visit me, and I shall have enough to do to
receive them with due honours, so we must put off the marriage for
some days, at least!'

But the gipsy pressed the king more and more to let him marry the
princess at once; he was even bold enough to tell his Majesty that he
could not wait any longer, and that the wedding would be all over in
an hour. The king, however, refused to hear anything of this; so the
gipsy, seeing that his plan had failed, went out from the presence of
the king in great anger.

A few hours later the three strange-looking ships dropped their
anchors just opposite the palace, and the young shepherd, landing,
came into the presence of the king, who was greatly astonished to see
him alive, and still more astonished to hear that in return for his
seventy piasters he had brought three vessels full of gold and silver.

The king was now very well content to accept him as his son-in-law,
and told him, in the course of conversation, what the gipsy had said
about his having gone in debt and been hung. Then the young shepherd
told his Majesty how he had found the gipsy, and had saved his life by
paying his debt for him. The king was exceedingly angry, and ordered
his servants to go after the gipsy and bring him at once into his
presence.

The servants looked about and around the palace on all sides, but
nowhere could they find any trace of the gipsy. Then the king
commanded that some of them should go in search of him without delay,
and armed men were speedily scattered over the whole country, so that
at last he was caught, and brought before the king, who condemned him
to be hung for having so shamefully tried to injure the man who had
saved his life and treated him so generously, and for having, at the
same time, attempted to cheat the king.

The young shepherd spent a few days in the palace, telling the king
all the things he had seen in the black world, and then, all
preparations having been made, he was married to the princess, with
great pomp and rejoicings.

Then the king with his daughter and son-in-law lived for a great many
years very happily.




