THE LENGMOOS WITCHES


A rich peasant of Lengstein had a son who had travelled a great deal,
and, on returning home, he laughed at the repeating of the rosary,
which all the good peasants are in the habit of saying every evening.
His mother was very anxious about the profane ideas and behaviour of
her son, for he mocked just as much at every other usage of the holy
church, which he was pleased to designate as "jokes of the priests."

One day several of his companions were sitting with him at the inn
called "Zu dem Ritter," and there some one of them recounted that on
every Thursday night hags had been seen dancing, and carrying on
their diabolical practices on the Birchboden, which was close by; they
were seen arriving on the mountain from all parts, riding on black
bricks, and holding there their unholy Sabbath. On hearing this, the
rich peasant's son laughed loudly, and said, "Wait, there I will dance
with them;" for it was just Thursday evening. His friends advised him
not to do so, but, in spite of their warnings, he set off, and they
accompanied him up to the Mittelberg, where stands the Kebelschmiede,
and where the wild stream of the Finsterbach rushes through a fearful
gully. From thence, the young fellow ran singing gaily through the
forest to where there is an open spot, called the Birchboden, and where
numberless pyramids of porphyry rise to the height of twenty and thirty
feet above the ground.

There he saw the frantic witches dancing and jumping together, and
performing all sorts of tricks. This pleased the mad young man, and
he ran to take part in their unholy dance; but when the huge clock of
the magnificent monastery of Lengmoos struck one, the Finsterbach
foamed wildly up, and the pyramids of porphyry tottered to their very
base. This the friends of the peasant, who were waiting for him, saw
perfectly well, and a wild storm of wind and hail came suddenly on, so
that they were obliged to take refuge in the hut of the Kebelschmid
(Kebelsmith). There they waited until the morning Angelus had rung,
at which moment they knew that the hags' power would come to an end,
and then they went to the witches' ground. But how terrified were they
when they found their wicked comrade transformed into a stone, and
fixed firmly into the earth, so that only three-quarters of him could
be seen. His stone form still remains on this dreadful spot, and no
green--not even an atom of moss--will grow over the head, body, hands,
or feet of the "Witch-dancer."

After nightfall no one dares to approach the scene of this terrible
retribution, where stands so fearful a warning to all mockers and
despisers of religion.




