LAGO SANTO


Among the high peaks which overhang the Cembra valley, lies a solitary
mountain lake whose little outlet falls into the foaming Nevisbach. A
small hut at the pointed end of the lake, and a deserted mine which
stands close by, surrounded by large heaps of debris, give evidence
to the former activity of the spot.

This dark lake is called "Lago Santo" (or Holy Lake).

Where it now stands there used to be a flourishing village, whose
inhabitants found in the neighbouring mines plenty of work and wealth;
they were a happy and contented race. A few miles off lay King
Laurin's crystal palace, and through the constant communication with
this good-hearted mountain King, they became clever and fortunate in
all their undertakings. But, as time went on, they grew haughty and
independent; foreign miners brought false doctrines into the parish,
and as the priest was either too weak or negligent to oppose their
wicked practices, in a few years the people became entirely corrupted.

About that time a poor man arrived in the village begging for alms, but
all Christian charity had disappeared, and he was turned off from every
door, even from that of the wealthy priest. At the end of the village
there lived a poor widow woman with a numerous family, who alone gave
a piece of bread to the mendicant, who told her in gratitude, "Tonight
you will hear a fearful noise in the village; however, you need not be
frightened, but pray, and for your life do not look out of the window."

After saying these words, the beggar disappeared, and when the family
had retired to rest, they were awakened at midnight by a terrible
storm. The thunder was terrific, and the lightning streamed over
the village, setting every building on fire; then the rain fell in
torrents, as though the flood-gates of Heaven were opened. The poor
widow was dreadfully terrified, and forgetting the command of the
beggar, she looked out of the window, but at the same moment she
received from an invisible hand such a blow in the face, that she fell
senseless to the ground.

As on the following morning she came again to herself, the terrors of
the night had disappeared, and the sun shone brilliantly down from
Heaven. The widow opened the door of her little hut, and, to her great
astonishment, found the whole country changed; the village had sunk
beneath the earth, and a dark See was spread over the spot where it
used to be; her little hut alone stood unhurt on the borders of the
new-formed lake.

Sometimes it is possible to see to the bottom of the lake, where the
avaricious priest paces slowly up and down, reading a book; he has
neglected the souls which had been entrusted to his care, and therefore
he has now to suffer penance.




