THE SPIRIT OF THE ZIRL USURER


Beneath the Solstein, which stands over 9000 feet high, and upon whose
summit on certain Thursdays the witches are said to dance, is situated
a dreadful chasm, which takes its name from the charming village of
Zirl, which lies at the foot of the mountain, and has more the aspect
of a little town than an Alpine village. There once lived a wealthy
miller, a noted usurer, who amassed no end of unjustly gained money,
and, as after his death none of his wealth was restored to those whom
he had defrauded, his spirit was condemned to the depths of the chasm,
where he suffered indescribable torments, and often during the night
his screams have been heard crying, "Help, help me!"

About twenty years ago, two merry gazelle hunters were walking in the
night from the village of Soln, over the Schuetzensteig, on their way
to Hoetting, and, as it became very dark, they resolved to pass the
night above the Zirl chasm, for fear of falling, in the darkness, over
some precipice, or meeting with any other accident. They lighted a
large fire, and during the night they heard somebody call out, "Help,
help me." The two men immediately thought some one had fallen down the
precipice, and one of them shouted, "Have patience, for the night is
too dark for us to venture down the gully, but to-morrow we will help
you out." In the early dawn they set off to hunt for a track by which
to descend the precipice to the rescue of the unfortunate traveller.

On their way they met the shepherd of Soln, and told him of their
night's adventure, and, as they recounted it to him, he said, "There
you may look in vain, for this call comes not from a lost traveller,
but from the wicked miller;" and he then told them all he knew about
the wretched money usurer. Many people of Zirl have also heard these
frightful screams for help, first in one place and then in another, for
the chasm is dreadfully deep and long. In the very depth of it, and at
the foot of the Solstein, lies the Graupenloch, where a roaring torrent
forms a high cascade, and fills the chasm with the roar of thunder,
and even to this day nobody has ever dared to descend to this spot.
There sits the spirit of the miserable usurer, howling, with chattering
teeth, in his freezing torment.




