THE COURAGEOUS SERVANT GIRL OF THE ZOTTA-FARM


In the Wattenserthal, which is about twenty miles in length, and where
at its end the Hochlizum Alp stands, lies on the right of the mountain
the beautiful Wotz Mountain, belonging to the farmer of Zotta-Hof,
which stands at its foot. Upon that mountain, during the winter time,
a "Kaser-Manndl" (a sort of ghost) is said to reside. This spirit
inhabits a hut which is situated on the top of the mountain, from
whence he makes a terrific noise, which is heard for miles around;
but towards Christmas he becomes more quiet and goes off again in the
spring. Before his departure a blackbird sings during many days, from a
pine which stands on the mountain, so beautifully that one could listen
to her for hours together.

Now it happened that in the house of the Zotta peasant a poor servant
girl was employed whose mother was very ill. As Christmas Day
approached she had to clean up the whole house, and on the Eve the
farmer divided the Christmas-cake between his family and servants;
and while he enjoyed his portion in company with his friends and
neighbours, one of them asked: "What is the Kaser-Manndl about to-day?
I wonder whether he is feting Christmas as well?" The farmer, who
had been drinking considerably, shouted in good humour: "I will give
the best cow out of my herd to whomever has the courage to go up the
mountain to-night and find out what the Kaser-Manndl is doing, and
brings me back in proof his milking-bucket and foot-warmer."

But all heard this proposition in silence, for none of them dared risk
so much danger to gain the cow, because the Kaser-Manndl was noted for
his ferocity, and many a one had returned from his neighbourhood with
a head almost smashed to pieces. But the poor servant girl collected
her courage and thought to herself: "I will undertake it in God's name.
Should I gain the cow, I shall be able to help my poor sick mother,
and as I have not the intention of going out of curiosity, Heaven will
protect me." So she agreed with the Zotta farmer, and set off up the
Alp, which is a constant ascent of six miles, battling with bitter
wind and snow as she went.

Far above her she saw the Kaser, or hut, brilliantly lighted.
Everything in it was clean to perfection, and the Kaser-Manndl was
sitting in his Sunday clothes at the hearth, his nose-warmer smoked in
his mouth, and he was cooking in a pan a coal-black meal. On entering
the hut the girl made as fine a curtsey as a peasant girl is able to
do, and the Manndl signed to her to approach the fire and join him at
his supper; but the girl was terrified at the sight of the compound,
and when the Manndl noticed this he said, "Do not be frightened, girl;
make only a 'Krizl Krazl' (a sign of the Cross) over the pan." The girl
did this, and to her great astonishment the pan became full of the most
beautiful cakes, which they both set to work to eat.

After a little while the Kaser-Manndl said, "I know the request
you wish to ask. You have come to carry off my milking-bucket and
foot-warmer. You shall have them without the asking, for you are a
brave girl, and when you arrive at the farm you will claim of the
peasant his cow together with the calf as punishment for having allowed
you to come up in such fearful weather."

The Zotta peasant was just setting out for the midnight mass as his
servant returned from the Alp with her proofs, and when she claimed the
cow he called her a stupid fool for having gone up the Alp and taken
his joke as reality, and he would not give her one pfennig, much less
the cow.

On the following morning there was a grievous Christmas-gift at the
Zotta-Hof: the Robblerin, the finest cow, lay dead in the stable, and
the farmer nearly tore off all his hair with grief, for this cow had
been his favourite and had carried the first prize at every show, for
which reason he had given her the name of "Robblerin," or champion.
"Had you given the cow to me," said the poor injured girl to her
master, "she would not have died. Will you now keep your word and give
me another?" But the farmer savagely refused this demand.

On the following morning they found that another beautiful cow, named
"Maierin," had strangled herself with her chain. On the next day a
third cow was found dead, and only now the peasant's hard heart began
to melt, for he was fearful lest he might lose his whole herd, and
therefore he gave the finest remaining cow to the girl, who directly
drove her off home; and from that moment poverty came to an end in the
house of the courageous servant girl, who prayed day and night for the
redemption of the Kaser-Manndl of the Wotz-Alm.




