THE GIANTS HEIMO AND THUERSE


Out of the Neustaedter-Thor of Innsbruck leads the Brenner-Strasse,
close by the beautiful and rich Abbey of the Premontaries Wilten,
called also Wiltau. On each side of the principal facade of the
magnificent church of this ancient cloister are still to be seen the
enormous stone statues of two giants who bear the names of Heimo and
Thuerse. Both giants belong to that age in which their huge race first
began to conform their rough nature to the ideas of civilization, when
Christianity entered into the then impenetrable valleys of the Tyrol.

One of these enormous mountain giants of the country was called Heime
or Heimo, who was so tall that he was obliged to raise the roof of his
house so that he could stand upright in it, and of the most cruel and
savage nature. The inhabitants of the surrounding country dreaded him
beyond measure, and begged him to spare their farms and homesteads,
offering to cede to him as much of their ground as he liked to decide
upon, and then, should he ask it all, they would retreat and cultivate
other parts of the country. In answer to this proposition, Heimo
yelled, while pointing out an enormous rock, "As far as I run with that
stone upon my shoulders so far is the ground my own." And saying so, he
seized the rock, walked up the little river Sill, turned on the left to
the Patscherkofl, went down through Igels and round Wilten, and after
having arrived again at the point from which he had started, he threw
the stone with enormous force westward. Then he began to build himself
at the outlet of the Sill valley, opposite the river Inn, an enormous
stronghold, for which he carried up huge rocks from the mountain clefts.

At that time there lived in the same valley another giant who was still
taller and stronger than Heimo, and he had his abode high over Zirl,
behind the jagged, bare, and steep peak of Solstein, upon the plateau
of Seefeld, which he was the first to cultivate, and where now stands
the hamlet of Tyrschenbach. Thuerse, this was the name of this giant,
hated Heimo, and took pleasure in always secretly destroying his newly
commenced building; and when Heimo discovered who caused him all this
damage, his gigantic fury awaked in him, and he went to attack Thuerse,
clad in light armour, and carrying an enormous sword. Thuerse hearing
the approach of Heimo, seized a ponderous beam, and then commenced such
a terrible fight that the earth trembled, and rocks as huge as a tower
detached themselves from the Solstein, and rolled down into the valley
below. Blows fell as thick as hail, and at last the better armed Heimo
was victor, for the savage Thuerse succumbed to his enemy.

Just at that period (it was about the middle of the ninth century) a
monk was preaching Christianity in the valleys of the Sill, whom Heimo
also went to hear, and he felt sorry and repented having slain Thuerse.
He became a Christian, and was baptized by the Bishop of Chur. Then
after having built the existing bridge over the Inn, from which the
city of Innsbruck has taken its name, he renounced worldly life, and
instead of finishing his stronghold, he built a monastery which is the
still standing Wiltau or Wildenau, commonly called Wilten.

This was a terrible disappointment to the devil, who sent a huge
dragon, of which there were already at that time a great many in the
Tyrol, to stop the building of the monastery; but Heimo attacked the
dragon, killed him and cut out his tongue. With this huge tongue in
his hand he is represented in his statue; and the tongue, which is a
yard and a half long, has been preserved in the cloister up to the
present day. Heimo became a monk at Wilten, lived a pious life, and on
his death was buried in the grounds of the monastery. The stone coffin
in which his gigantic bones repose is still to be seen there, and it
measures twenty-eight feet three inches. Upon the coffin used to be his
statue carved in wood, which has since decayed, but there is still
hanging above it an ancient granite slab on which is recounted his
history.




