THE SORCERER OF SISTRANS


In Sistrans, a village close to Innsbruck, there lived, some sixty
years ago, a man who was noted in all the surrounding districts for
his evil and quarrelsome disposition. He attended every Kermesse and
village meeting at which it was the custom of the blackguards of the
surrounding country to go and fight, but he never found one who could
master him.

This superhuman strength was not his only distinguishing quality,
for he was well up in other more doubtful arts, and was able to do
rather more than "boil pears without wetting the stalk." Should a
fine fox or a fat hare be running in the forest close by, he set his
traps just behind his stove, and in the morning the game was sure to
be caught. Should anything have been stolen, people came to him, for
he had means of compelling the stolen goods to be restored. For this
purpose, he merely took a little book bound in pigskin out of his box,
and began to read; and wherever the thief might be, he was forced by
some irresistible power to take the stolen goods upon his back and
bring them before the sorcerer, by whom the proprietor must always be
present. This little book had such a power that, at each word read
by the sorcerer from it, the thief was obliged to make a step; and
three times woe to him who had stolen something which was heavy, or
was obliged to bring his burden from a long distance, or over steep
mountains, while the man was reading; from far off his pantings could
be heard, and he was drenched in perspiration when he arrived at the
spot.

One day the sorcerer made himself a footstool of nine different sorts
of wood, upon which he knelt down close to the organ in the church, and
looked down upon the people, and there saw all the old hags and witches
as they stood at the lower end of the church. After the service was
over, these old hags set upon him in herds, and would have torn him to
pieces had not the priest come in time to his rescue, for the hags now
discovered that he had found them out.

This man had once on Christmas Eve stolen the consecrated Host, while
the priest held it up after the consecration, and carried it with him,
wrapped in a little piece of cloth always hidden on his left arm. From
this proceeded all his unsurpassable tricks and indomitable strength.
But at last came the "Scythesman Death," who cast him down upon the bed
of sickness, and, in spite of all his strength and cleverness, he was
bound to die; but that was a very hard thing for him. Three long days
and nights the quarreller lay in the last agony without being able to
die. Several times the priest came to him, and at last, after long
exhortations and prayers, the dying man made a confession.

The Host, which had already grown into the arm, was cut out, and all
the books and writings belonging to the art of sorcery which could be
found were burnt; and as they were thrown into the flames it roared and
thundered dreadfully, and there was such a terrific heat that the lead
in the window-frames melted and ran down in streams, and during this
hellish noise the sorcerer died.




