THE VILLAGE ON THE BODEN-ALP


After traversing the valley of the Almajur, which sends its waters into
the river Lech, one arrives at the Boden-Alp, which, together with
the mountain called Almajur, belongs to the village of Stanz. Upon the
Almplace of the Boden used to stand in days gone by a beautiful village
which had become, through the neighbouring silver mines belonging to
it, immensely rich. The inhabitants in course of time grew so luxurious
that they did not know what to do with their wealth, and it came into
their heads to fill their houses with all sorts of utensils of gold and
silver. They even kept their windows shut during the day, for the light
of God's beautiful sun was not good enough for them, and preferred in
their iniquity to burn candles in massive silver candlesticks. The
patience of Heaven regarded this crime for very long, hoping, perhaps,
that the folly would outwork itself; but as it only increased the more,
the Lord proceeded with his just punishment. The whole village with
its church and people sank beneath the earth, and the once flourishing
valley became a desolate wilderness.

About forty years ago a herdboy of Boden went about in the underwood
seeking for a lost calf, when all of a sudden he ran up against a large
iron cross which was standing out from the ground. This was the cross
on the tower of the sunken church. He tried to drag it up and cleared
away the surrounding bushes; there he discovered the coping stones of
the tower, on which the cross was so firmly planted that he could not
move it; and when he returned on the following day with several other
people to dig it out, it was no longer to be seen.

Not many years ago a peasant of Hegerau in the Lech-Thal, whose name
was Klotz, passed by that mountain and entered into a sort of tunnel
through the rock, where, on account of the bad weather, he took
shelter. He lighted a torch to discover the depth of the tunnel, and
in walking on he suddenly found himself in the sunken church. The high
altar was gorgeously lighted, and the candles stood in large silver
lustres. The peasant walked about in the church, and found a man
sleeping on one of the benches, who as he awoke him inquired the time,
and when the peasant told him, he sighed and said, "Ah! it is still far
from the time."

What he meant by these words remains still an enigma, but the peasant
seized one of the silver lustres from the altar and ran off in terror.
He arrived home late at night carrying the lustre, and would have
believed all as a dreadful dream, had he not the lustre with him as
witness. He went to rest, and on the following morning he was dead. His
wife ordered the lustre to be carried back to its place, but it was
impossible to find again the entrance of the underground church.




