THE FRATRICIDE UPON THE HOCHALP


The "Hochalp" (or High Alp), near Scharnitz, was some two centuries
ago covered up to the top with the finest grass and woods, and the now
cleared Fitzwald was the most beautiful forest in the whole Tyrol. It
reached up to the very summit of the mountain, which was covered with
such enormous trees, that three men could not encompass one of them
with their arms; in one word, the Hochalp was a "Cow-Heaven," as it was
generally called by the peasants. Where now the sheep climb about, at
that time there were but cows pastured, and the cattle thrived there
better than anywhere else.

The Alp belonged to a rich peasant of Leutasch, named Simele, who had
two sons, who, after his death, commenced a serious quarrel about which
of them was to have the Alp. The younger brother was a good man, but
the other was a real wretch; and, as they could not agree, they drew
lots for the Alp, which fell to Johann, the younger of the two.

After this he married a good village girl, whom his brother Matz had
set his eyes upon, and from whom he had received a refusal. Johann
lived happily with his wife, while his brother boiled over with bitter
spite, and month after month his determination of seeking revenge
increased. He commenced a law suit, finding false witnesses, and swore
a false oath, so that the Court declared the drawing invalid, and
awarded the Alp to Matz.

Whilst all this was going on, Johann was busy on the Alp, and so heard
nothing of the judgment; and as his brother entered fiercely into the
hut, and tried to pitch him out of it, he defended himself until his
herdsmen arrived, who chased him away, after having beaten him soundly.
At this reception Matz foamed with rage; so, running home, he seized
his gun, crept in the following night back to the hut in which his
brother was sleeping, and shot him dead in his bed.

But Johann's soul was scarcely out of his body, when God's wrath
appeared and fearfully punished the perjurer and fratricide. A terrible
storm came on with lightning, thunder, snow, hail, and wild pouring
rains, so that everything was overthrown and inundated. After that an
earthquake convulsed the ground, and on both sides the mountains fell
into the valley, covering the Alm huts and meadows more than sixty feet
deep with debris. The murderer was swallowed among the falling rocks,
and is condemned to suffer dreadfully beneath them. He is still heard
very often shrieking in agony, and all the pilgrimages which his family
have made for his redemption have been in vain.

As nobody could do anything with the valley covered with rocks and
stones, the decried spot fell into the hands of the monastery of
Werdenfels, and wherever it was possible, the monks have restored
cultivation, so that new forests and meadows have in course of time
sprung up upon the ruins of the once famous Alp.

A beautiful little chapel has been erected there, in which several
times during the course of the year service is performed; but the
spirit of the murderer still wanders around and groans so dreadfully
during the night, that every one is terrified. There he must remain
until the last day, and what will happen to him then God alone knows.




