THE SENDERSER-PUTZ


In the Senderser valley, which winds up the mountain from Innsbruck,
behind the villages of Axams, Goetzens, and Grinzens, upon the high
Alps, stands the Kemateneler Alm, also called Heach, upon which the
peasants of Kematen pasture about a hundred cows.

On this Heach, so goes the legend, on the eves of great fete days a
gigantic Alm Ghost is to be seen, who unchains the cows, and lets them
run upon the Alm, while with enormous speed and strength he cleans the
stables, and carries off the litter in a wheel-barrow. He does this
work with so much rapidity that the mountain trembles; and when the
morning Angelus rings in the village, the work is all finished, and
the cows are again chained up in their stalls. Of course, the frequent
recurrence of this fact accustomed the people to it, and they leave
the Putz alone, as he never injures them, but rather, on the contrary,
renders them a great service.

But when the good old cow-herd died, a new one took his place, a man
devoid in every way of either religion or good feeling, who would not
believe in the apparition, and only laughed at all those who affirmed
its existence. Soon afterwards, when he heard with his own ears the
noise made by the busy Alm-Putz, he wished to sift the matter to the
bottom, and discover whether the Putz used a supernatural wheelbarrow
or the one appertaining to his own worthy self; so, for this purpose,
he tied a bell to the vehicle in question. The eve of the next fete
day the herdsman and some companions heard the well-known sound of
the bell which he had attached to the barrow. "Do you hear?" said the
herdsman; "the Putz really uses my wheelbarrow, so now he must only
work for us." And, in saying so, he joked and sneered, in spite of the
repeated exhortations of the other men, who ran off in terror at his
oaths.

About a fortnight afterwards the cow-herd was standing at midday
before his hut, while his two milkers were getting their dinner, when
all at once the gigantic ghost passed by, and the wicked man shouted
after him in derision, "Be not so proud, sorcerer, but come and eat
with us, since you have worked so hard a whole night for us." The Putz
replied not one word, but striding towards the herdsman, he regarded
him so ferociously, that the frightened man fled in terror into the
hut, where the Putz followed him. The milkers heard the screams of
their companion, but dare not go to his rescue until the Putz had left
the hut, and when they found courage to enter it, they discovered the
wicked man lying on the floor, covered with fearful wounds and bruises.
They carried him down to the village, where he died two days afterwards.

Since that time no one has ever dreamed of interfering with the
terrible Alm Ghost; the villagers leave him in peace to follow his
favourite mountain occupation.




