THE GLUNKEZER GIANT


In the Volder valley, out of which rises the Glunkezer, and where now
stands the sheep Alp, called Tulfein, is a very picturesque mountain
meadow, in the middle of which, some centuries ago, a peaceful King
had built his palace, in which he lived with his four daughters, of
whom each was more beautiful than the other. Round about the palace was
a magnificent garden, full of Wonder-Flowers, and large expanses of
meadow-lands, upon which tame Alpine animals browsed in large herds,
and of these the four daughters of the King were very fond. They went
also very often down into the huts of poor herds-people, to whom
they did all sorts of charity, and all around they were honoured and
reverenced as protecting genii.

This quiet happiness was troubled, and at last destroyed, by the
arrival of a wild giant in this Alpine paradise, who built himself
a cavern on the top of the Glunkezer, from whence, during the night,
he roared so dreadfully that the mountains trembled, and huge masses
of rock rolled down into the valleys. After he had caught sight of
the four daughters of the King, he determined to try and gain one of
them for his wife; so he decorated his bearskin mantle with enormous
new buttons, tore up a fine tree for a walking-stick, passed his
long finger-nails a few times through his shaggy beard and hair, and
set off down to the Tulfein to pay his addresses. The King's heart
trembled with fright as he saw this pretender to the hand of one of his
daughters, and replied that his daughters were perfectly free to choose
their own husbands, therefore, if one of them would accept him, he
should have no opposition to make.

Upon this the giant made himself as small as possible, but that was
not very much, and did not bring him in much either, for one after
the other of the girls refused him. This enraged the giant out of
bounds, and he determined upon the most terrible vengeance, which he
did not tarry in executing as quickly as possible. In the following
night, rocks as large as a house rolled down upon the Tulfein, hurled
against the palace, which they carried along with its inhabitants into
the Wild-See, into whose depth it disappeared, and which was almost
completely filled up with the tumbling rocks. The little of its dark
waters which is still left, now bears the name of the "Schwarzenbrunn"
(black spring), and round about it is a "death valley," for nothing
will grow there.

After the vengeance of the giant was satiated, repentance came over
him, and he mourned for the murdered innocent father and daughters,
he sat for whole nights on the borders of the Wild-See, into which he
gazed, and howled and cried so incessantly, that even the stones had
pity on him, for they became quite soft, and his cavern trembled and
fell to ruin. At last he bewitched himself and became a mountain dwarf,
while the King's daughters were transformed into fairies or mermaids,
and appear often on moonlight nights, floating over the water. There
then sits the small grey dwarf, stretching longingly his hands towards
their light forms, which however dissolve in mist; the dwarf then
plunges again into the See, with a noise so great that it seems as
though a large rock had fallen into it, and cools in a cold bath the
agony of his remorse.




