THE WITCHES' WALK ON THE KREUZJOCH


Near the village of Mieders, in the Stubaythal, lies a little side
valley, in which in dreary solitude stands a small wooden hut opposite
to an old, half-ruinous farm-building. In this hut there lived, some
fifty years ago, a wicked woman, called Toeglas Moid, who was originally
married to an honest peasant of the neighbourhood, who, however, died
soon after through grief at the bad practices of his wife. After his
death she led a yet worse life, and was in consequence everywhere
dreaded as a witch; for she was known to have done, and to still do,
endless harm among the cows. She had chosen five other women of her
feather to be her companions and helpmates, and often the whole six
of them set out from Mieders to the Telfes mountain, where at certain
times they have been seen by the herdsmen carrying on their unholy
Sabbath.

At last it seems that they went to such an extent that they entered
into a compact with the Evil One, and then the destruction which they
caused in the surrounding country was so great that the villagers were
forced to apply for the aid of the Church, according to whose decree
they had to appear before the tribunal, where the five companions of
Toeglas Moid confessed everything, and from that time began to lead a
new life; while she who had led them on in all their wickedness became
worse and worse every day, and carried on her diabolical practices
alone during yet another five long years, until at last the measure of
her iniquities was full.

On the 24th of June, 1823, St. John the Baptist's Day, a fearful
thunderstorm broke over Mieders, during which the mountains were
splintered with the lightning, and huge masses of rock fell down from
every direction into the valley.

On the following morning some peasants passing by the hut of Toeglas
Moid, looked in to discover if the witch was there; but she was
nowhere to be seen. But close by the Witches' Walk the most fearful
screams were heard, which so terrified both man and beast that one
of the herdsmen ran down to the village for help; for the cows were
panic-stricken and beyond their control. When the terrified herdsmen
arrived with a crowd of villagers upon the witches' ground, they found
her cut into pieces, which they collected and burnt upon a pile of
brushwood; and during this operation such fearful noises were heard in
the valley and on the surrounding mountains that every one was seized
with fear and trembling.

The parish of Mieders erected in gratitude for the riddance of this
witch a large stone cross upon the Witches' Walk, to which every year,
on the 24th of June, a great procession takes place. This spot is
called the "Kreuzjoch," or cross yoke, and from it a beautiful view is
obtained of the valley villages of Telfes and Stubay, and of several
magnificent glaciers.




