BIENER'S WIFE


In the ancient castle of Buechsenhausen, which stands just above
Innsbruck, still wanders about the apparition of one of its former
possessors. The legend does not say to whom the castle originally
belonged, but old chronicles relate that it passed, in the sixteenth
century, into the hands of the celebrated iron-founder, Gregor Loeffler,
who gave it the name of "Buechsenhausen" (home of guns), because he had
established there a gunfoundry. Later on it fell into the power of
the reigning family of Austria, and the Archduchess Claudia presented
it to her favourite Chancellor, Wilhelm von Biener, a liberal-minded
nobleman, gifted with the doubtful talent of writing the most cutting
satires, whose venomous point he turned against the nobility and
church, and, for this reason, he brought upon himself the hatred of all
those against whose opinion he wrote; but the favour of the Archduchess
protected the talented statesman, who was most faithfully devoted to
her interests.

On the 2nd of August, 1648, the Archduchess died, and then the
enemies of Herr von Biener set to work so energetically that, after
a short time, they succeeded in turning him out of his position, and
imprisoned him on the 28th of August, 1650. A royal commission of
noblemen, consisting of Biener's greatest enemies, hastened down to
Buechsenhausen, and claimed from his wife all his papers and documents,
amongst which they discovered satires, which were most useful to their
purpose. He was accused of high-treason, and, as his enemies were both
his accusers and judges, he was condemned to death. His wife visited
him while he was in prison, and he, who knew himself to be guiltless of
any crime, always consoled her with these words:--"There can be no God
in Heaven if they are allowed to murder an innocent man."

On the 17th of July, 1651, Herr von Biener was executed in public.
The sword which was used on the occasion is still to be seen in the
castle of Buechsenhausen. His wife had sent a messenger to the Emperor
to pray for a reprieve, which he had granted; but one of Biener's most
deadly enemies, President Schmaus, of the Austrian Court, stopped the
messenger, and of course the execution ensued.

A few days afterwards, the rascal who had stopped the merciful errand
of the Emperor was found dead through the judgment of God. Frau von
Biener went raving mad; through the whole house she tore from room to
room, crying, "There is no God; there is no God." At last she climbed
up the peak behind the Martinswand, and threw herself over a precipice
into a deep chasm, out of which she was carried a corpse to Hoettingen,
where she was buried on the left-hand side of the altar, under a plain
tombstone bearing no inscription, and with only a cross cut upon it.

Since her death she has appeared very often as a wandering ghost to a
great number of persons, and the inhabitants of the surrounding country
have given her the name of the "Bienerweibele" (Biener's Wife). Clad
in long black robes, slowly and solemnly she walks along through all
the rooms in the castle, passes through firmly locked doors, stops with
a woeful look at the bedside of peacefully sleeping people, appears
to each proprietor and his wife before their death with wonderful
consolation, always foretelling the immediate approach of the "Dreaded
Spirit," and never harms those who have never done her any injury.
But in the year 1720, it happened that a descendant of one who had
been instrumental in her husband's death, who was sleeping in the
castle, was found dead in his bed on the following morning, with a most
fearfully contorted neck. The ghost appears in a black velvet mantle,
and bears on her head a little bonnet, called in the dialect of the
country, "Hierinnen," embroidered with black lace, and on the back
of her head a beautiful little golden crown, which is fastened on her
hair by the means of a silver pin. People say that in former times the
apparition was quite black, but at present it is more grey, and every
day she is becoming more light, until at last her unhappy spirit will
be redeemed.




