THE FIERY BOAR OF KOHLERSTADL


On the main road from the village of Mutters to the hamlet of Goetzens
lies a brown wooden hut in the middle of a lovely flowery plain, which
is called the "Broat-Wiese" (broad meadow). The road leads through
dells and valleys, and in passing through this grand and desolate
spot, the traveller is unable to overcome a certain sense of awe,
which overhangs this dreaded spot, particularly should he happen to
pass that way after the shades of evening have fallen. The hut is an
old hay-shed, which has the resemblance of a large dark coffin; close
to this hut stands a little chapel, erected to the memory of a poor
traveller, who was frozen to death on that spot, in the year 1815.

This place is decried and avoided, on account of the fearful
apparition, which is said to wander round the spot; and many a one
who has tried to pass that way during the night has been glad to
return safely back again to the village. Close by lies a dense forest
of fir-trees, the rendezvous of tribes of ravens, which render the
surroundings still more dismal with their ominous croakings. If,
perchance, the traveller hears the cuckoo, he crosses himself, for it
bears in the Tyrol the reputation of being the devil's own bird, and
the evil one himself, the worst of the phantoms, rejoices in adopting
his voice.

There has frequently been seen upon the plain, close by the hut, which
is called the Kohlerstadl, a fiery wild boar, and many people are of
the opinion that the old monster of the Unholdenhof, of which has been
spoken in the preceding legend, wanders about there in that form, while
others say that this same fiery boar is a devil's phantom; and there
are numberless people who have seen it.

A rich peasant of Natters, whose name is Klaus Sinnis, went up one day
with his hay-cart to a meadow-valley, called Goetzens-Lufens, and as he
passed by the Kohlerstadl it was already growing dark, and night was
coming on very fast. There suddenly the fiery boar rushed before his
horses, which began to rear and kick, and he was unable to get them
on one step further, so that he was compelled to return home with his
empty cart.

A herdsman of Goetzens was driving his cows home from Mutters, and close
by the dreaded spot he met the boar, tearing madly round in a circle.
On catching sight of this hideous phantom, the cows set up their tails
and rushed wildly off in every direction, so that most of them fell
down the precipices and were lost.

Others have seen on the same spot black dogs, and heard unearthly
screams and howls which have pierced to their very soul.




