THE CAT-HAGS OF GRIES


Cats generally take a large share in anything appertaining to
witchcraft, and as single apparitions, out of the company of some
hag, they are scarcely, if ever, to be seen; though Peter, one of the
servants at the farm of Simel, near the village of Gries, once had the
misfortune to meet them.

The farmer was an excellent manager, and never allowed any of his
servants to be out in the evening after the Angelus had sounded. But
Peter had been a volunteer, during the revolution of 1848, and, as
such, he considered himself entitled to take more liberty than the
others, and to go after hours and pay a visit to his love. One evening,
just as he had arranged to carry out this plan, the farmer, who was
a member of the parish administration, said, after supper, to his
servants, "Now you all go to bed; at two o'clock to-morrow morning I
shall call you, for it has been decided by the Council that we must go
oftener on patrol round about, to keep on the look out for the Welsh
republicans, which are expected in the country, and to shoot them down
wherever they appear, for the sake of preserving order and peace."

This command anything but pleased Peter, who, however, apparently
obeyed, and went to bed; but soon afterwards he got up very quietly,
and thought to himself, "Long before the clock strikes two I shall be
back;" and then he crept silently through the stables, and hurried
towards the Berghof farm, on the mountain where his sweetheart lived,
to bid her good-bye for ever, should it be necessary, in case he fell
in the war against the Welsh rebels.

He remained till one o'clock at the Berghof, and then he set off home,
running as fast as ever he could, and he had arrived already within
a distance of two or three hundred feet of the Simel farm, when,
just over his head, he caught the sound of suppressed whispering. He
looked about, and lo! all about him, the air and ground was full of
cats, of all colours and shapes, black, white and tricoloured, which
sprang upon him from every direction. Frightened out of his wits, poor
Peter began to pray and cross himself, when all at once the tribe of
cats disappeared; but this release did not last long, for when he
had reached the farm, he found the cats sitting in a swarm round the
entrance-door, and they stopped him from getting in, and against this
no praying, no cross-making could avail, for the cats set up such a
terrific noise, that the poor bewildered fellow lost his senses of
hearing and seeing. He made up his mind, however, to get into the farm
at any risk, and, springing through the cats, he gained the little door
by which he had gone out; but the door was closed, so he was forced
to knock at the great entrance, where he was received by the farmer
himself, who, after giving him a good scolding, concluded his sermon
in these words:--"There is nothing so fine spun but that it comes
always to the sun."




