HAHNENKIKERLE


In the hotel of the 'Golden Star,' at Innsbruck, there once arrived a
very rich foreign Princess, who was suffering from a terrible disorder,
which had baffled the efforts of every doctor to cure. Dr. Theophrast,
of whom the Princess had heard, and whom she had come to Innsbruck to
consult, declared that it was a malady over which he had no control,
although he was a "Wonder Doctor." This was a great loss to the Doctor,
and a terrible shock to the Princess, who had travelled so far in hopes
of a cure.

One day when she was lying inconsolable in her bed, a little tiny man
came into the room, who offered his services and gave her a potion,
which he told her would restore her to health. But the little fellow
added that on that day year he should return, and if she had forgotten
his name, which was "Hahnenkikerle," she must promise to marry him,
and to live with him under the Hoettinger Klamm. The Princess gladly
accepted this proposition, and she awoke on the following morning as
fresh and healthy as a May rose.

She remained in Innsbruck, where she gave feast after feast, and in
this way the year soon passed by. All at once she remembered her
promise to the little dwarf, whose name had escaped her, and every
effort to recall it was in vain. She asked many people, but no one
could tell her; she confided her anxiety to her friends, but, of
course, they could neither help her nor give her any advice. Only a
poor servant girl, who came to hear of it, determined to try and help
the good Princess. So she went into the Klamm, hoping to hear something
certain there; she listened, and crept about all over, and at last she
heard in the depth of the Klamm a joyous shouting, and down below
she saw the dwarf jumping and singing, "Hurrah! the Princess in the
'Star' doesn't know that my name is Hahnenkikerle." The girl hurried
home as fast as she could, and told the Princess all she had heard. Now
the Princess remembered the name, and when the day came and the dwarf
appeared, she called out to him, "Hahnenkikerle;" at hearing this the
dwarf rushed away raging into the mountain.

The girl was rewarded by the Princess; and when she married an honest
burgher of Innsbruck, she received a princely dower.




