THE GIANT JORDAN


To the east of the Ungarkopf, and high above the cavern called
Eggerskeller, there stands, close to a dizzy chasm in the rocks, the
Kohlhuette (coal hut), which is surrounded by steep grey mountain walls.
Not long since there resided in this hut a wild man, with his wife
Fangga. Jordan, for this was the name of the giant, employed himself
in stealing children and beasts which he devoured, and he occupied his
time also in hunting the poor fairies, whom he caught and killed, or
shut up in underground prisons.

One day he brought home a fairy, most probably one of those which
resided in the Eggerskeller, and who was already more dead than alive.
He threw her down at the feet of his wife, and was on the point of
killing her, but Fangga said, "Let the thing live; it will be of use to
me."

"So," growled the monster; "what can you do with her?"

"I should like to have her in the hut to make her work," answered his
gigantic wife.

"Take then the thing," shouted the giant; "the white cat to the black
one!" for the giant couple had in their hut a huge black cat which the
giant had made a present to his wife in a similar manner after having
caught it in the mountains.

The poor fairy now bore the yoke of servitude, under the giant couple,
who called her Hitte Hatte. She was obliged to wear servant's clothes
and do servant's drudgery, which she did so cleverly and quickly that
Fangga was contented with her, and treated her as kindly as it was
in her brutal nature to do. Hitte Hatte was kind to the cat, fed her
regularly, let her sleep in her own bed, and got altogether fond of
her. Although she had now taken entirely the nature of a human being,
she constantly longed to be free of the giants, and one day she took
the occasion while Jordan was out and Fangga sleeping, to slip down
into the valley and to seek her fortune amongst mankind. The cat, as
though she knew the intention of her friend, followed her every step of
the way, and so it happened that one evening a pretty girl, followed by
a huge black cat, entered the farm of Seehaus, which is close to the
village of Strad, in the Gurgl valley, and offered her services. The
farm people, whose name was Krapf, a very good and worthy couple, were
not very well off just then, as they had suffered some heavy losses,
and therefore at that time did not keep many servants. So they engaged
the pretty girl for very small wages, without even asking her who
she was or from whence she came. She did her work joyfully and well,
and with her blessings entered Seehaus; it was a pleasure to see how
beautifully Hitte Hatte, for this name she had kept up, managed and
arranged everything. The cleverest old peasant woman would never have
been able to do so well as she did. She went about her work quietly,
spoke little, and never anything without purpose; was always modest
and reserved, and the people of the farm left her to go on in her
quiet way just as she liked. Her greatest pet was and remained the cat,
which was also very useful in keeping the house and buildings clear of
rats and mice. Hitte Hatte only knew one fear, and that was the giant,
who on account of her flight had made a most fearful noise, and beaten
his wife without mercy; but in the valley he could not touch her, for
the village boundaries were every year blessed by the priest, and there
were all round about little crosses and chapels, of which the gigantic
race of pagans had the greatest terror.

While Hitte Hatte was still in Seehaus Farm, two boys of Strad had
climbed up the Ungarkopf to gather strawberries, and approached by
accident the giant's abode. As the evening shadows began to fall the
boys got tired and hungry, and were about to return home, when they saw
blue smoke arising quite close to them, which ascended out of Jordan's
Kohlhuette, and one of the boys shouted to the other, "Look at the
smoke! there, I am sure they are making cakes; let us go and see if we
can't get some."

They soon arrived at the door of the hut, which was carefully closed,
so one of them scrambled up on the roof, removed one of the wooden
tiles and peeped down below. Fangga, who was busy at her kitchen, heard
him in a moment, and called out, "Who is up there on my roof?"

The boy answered, "It is I with my good companion. We are hungry, and
pray you kindly to give us something to eat."

Fangga opened the door and called out, "Come in, my boys, and you shall
have something, but be quick and creep into this hole (she pointed out
the stove), and keep very quiet there, for the 'wild man' is coming
very soon, and if he catches sight of you he will eat you bones and
all."

On hearing this the boys were terrified out of their wits, and crept
into the stove, and directly afterwards the giant entered the hut, and
sniffing round with hideous rolling eyes, he shouted to his wife, "I
smell, I smell human meat!"

But Fangga, who had not been educated in an Innsbruck school, answered
him very sharply, "You smell, you smell the devil!"

Then the giant gave such a tremendous snort that the whole hut trembled
as though it had been shaken by the wind, and the boys terrified
lest the stove should fall and kill them, jumped out of it. As Jordan
caught sight of them his rage grew still more horrible; he overloaded
Fangga with imprecations and abuse, shut the boys up in a cupboard and
took the keys with him while he ran off to catch a lost goat of whose
bell he just caught the sound. The poor boys now began to scream and
implore, and at last Fangga, cruel and hard as she was, was touched
with pity, and consented to release them. But as she had not the key of
the cupboard, she kicked at the door till it flew open, let the boys
out, and told them the best means of making their escape, and away they
went as fast as ever their legs would carry them.

They had not gone long when the wild man returned home, but without
his goat, which had also escaped him, so he vowed now to kill the
boys; but as the cupboard was empty and he could nowhere find them, he
thundered new imprecations at Fangga, who however took no notice of
them. The savage monster then seized his boarskin mantle, and set off
in pursuit of them. He arrived at last on the edge of a wild roaring
mountain-torrent, on the other side of which he caught sight of them,
and he called out in the sweetest and softest voice he could command,
"Tell me, dear boys, how you got over the river!"

"Ho! wild man," shouted the boys, "go up the river, and further on you
will find the plank over which we crossed."

Jordan now tore along the banks of the river for miles and miles,
about as far as from Nassereit to Siegmundsberg, where he found a weak
bending board upon which he stepped, and plump down went the monster
into the wild foaming water, in which he had to struggle for a long
time ere he succeeded in reaching the opposite bank. Meanwhile the boys
had got far in advance; but the giant ran as fast as he could, and soon
caught sight of them again on the other side of a large lake which he
did not know how to get over, as he had no idea of swimming, and wade
through he dared not, as he did not know how deep it might be, and
there was no boat either large enough to carry him over. Therefore he
shouted again to the boys in a flattering tone, "Dear boys, tell me
how you got over the lake!"

The boys answered, "We have tied large stones round our necks, upon
which we have swum across."

So he took a heavy rock and tied it firmly round his neck, jumped into
the water, and was immediately drowned. So the boys escaped, and people
say Fangga did not die of grief over the loss of her savage husband.

A few days afterwards Lorenz Mayrhofer, a friend of the farmer of
Seehaus, returning from the market of Imst where he had sold a team of
oxen, and carrying the yokes on his shoulders, stopped at Krapf's house
on his way home, and over a glass of Tyrolian wine with which Hitte
Hatte had herself served him, he said to his friend, "One sees most
wonderful things in these times. After leaving the Doellinger Hof on my
way here, a voice called out to me from the heights of the mountain,
'Carrier of the yokes, tell Hitte Hatte that she can now go home, for
Jordan is dead.'"

The farmer and his wife looked at one another and then at Hitte Hatte,
who, hearing the news, set down the ladle which she was holding, and
said, "If Jordan is dead, then I am happy again. Take great care of
the hairy house-worm. I thank you much for your kindness to me, and
wish you all luck with your farm. If you had asked me more I should
have told you more," and in saying so she passed out of the door, and
has never again been seen.

The farmer, his wife, and friend were struck dumb with astonishment,
and could not divine the girl's meaning. Under the "hairy house-worm,"
she had meant the cat. "What a pity it is," still now say the peasants
of Strad, "that the Seehaus farmer never asked more of the fairy, for
if he had done so we should know more."




