THE THREE SISTERS OF FRASTANZ


To the east of Frastanz, upon the boundaries of Feldkirch, lies a
chain of mountains, leading southwards towards the principality of
Lichtenstein, out of which range rise three lofty bare grey jagged
mountain peaks, which form the boundary marks of the country, and bear
the name of "the Three Sisters," to which are joined the Frastanz Alps.

Towards the end of the last century, a Venediger-Manndl used to come
every year into that country, for the purpose of picking up gold, of
which large quantities were to be found, especially in the forest
valley of Samina, which is situated between the Three Sisters and
the Ziegerberg. The Manndl used to fly through the air from Venice,
carrying a large jar, which he put under a mountain spring, which
threw up gold grains from a subterranean river, and when the jar was
full he flew off with it home again. As a proof, he once showed the
jar full of gold to some herdsmen, who were pasturing their cows
in the neighbourhood; but they would not be taken in, and so they
crossed themselves and let the Venetian go, for they knew that he was a
sorcerer, who practised his arts through supernatural power, like all
Venediger-Manndl used to do.

At that time, there lived at Frastanz three sisters, who upon a great
fete day, instead of going to mass, set out very early in the morning
to climb the mountain, for the purpose of gathering strawberries,
which grew there in quantities, with the intention of selling them
in the afternoon at Feldkirch. Upon the mountain they met the
Venediger-Manndl, who indignantly and furiously asked them, "What are
you doing here to-day?" The girls were terrified, for their consciences
reproached them for having neglected their duty on such a great fete
day, for the sake of gaining a little money, and they answered,
"Nothing, nothing." Then the sorcerer replied, with a voice towering
with passion, "Well, then, you shall turn into nothing, nothing but
bare rocks, without grass or leaf, without tree or fruit, and beneath
you shall be hidden my golden wealth, which no mortal being shall ever
succeed in finding." At the same moment the three girls were turned
into stone, for the sorcerer, in gaining power over them by their
crime, redeemed himself, and delivered them in his stead to the evil
one.

There still stand the Three Sisters, touching the clouds as three
mountain peaks; but the Venetian has never been seen again, and his
wealth-stream is said to have been dried up. The Three Sisters look
solemnly down upon the upper part of the valley, called Rheinthal, upon
Vaduz, and the country of Lichtenstein.




