THE PILLER-SEE


Where the lovely Piller-See now lies, with its green rippling waters
about one and a half miles long by three-quarters wide, close to the
village of St. Ulrich, there used to stand one of the most beautiful
and most fertile Alps of the whole Tyrol, belonging formerly to several
peasants, who pastured large herds of animals upon it. They were rich
in cows, and grass, and had their beautiful Alp besides to depend upon;
so they were the happiest and wealthiest peasants in all the world. But
instead of being grateful to Heaven for all its blessings, they became
vain, thinking only of amusement and dancing, and every Sunday and
fete-day they passed in all sorts of frivolous pleasures. The Alp soon
assumed the appearance of a heathen garden, and all those who paid no
regard to the opinion of the world flocked there to enjoy their guilty
pleasure.

The dissolute villagers wanting one day to play at their favourite
game of nine-pins, and having neither balls nor pins, seized upon
the beautiful alpine which they found in a farm close by, ready for
the morrow's market, and turned it to the purposes of their game;
but suddenly the shed in which they were amusing themselves began to
give way, and all the surrounding ground, together with the adjacent
mountains, sank beneath their feet. Upon whatever spot they trod the
earth slipped from under them, and out of the earth water sprang, and
every one of them was drowned in the new-formed lake. Only a musician
who had been forced against his will to climb the Alp and play to them
was saved, for, sitting on his chair, he was driven to the borders of
the lake by the swelling current.

This lake is now called the "Piller-See," which in certain places is
fathomless. One day some people tried to measure its depth, when they
heard a hollow voice proceeding from the bottom of the See, calling
out:--

  "If you fathom me, I swallow you."

This, like many other of the Tyrolian lakes, is supposed to have
the power of dragging into its fathomless depths all those who are
unfortunate enough to fall asleep on its fatal shores.




