RANAVIRASING


Once upon a time in the town of Vañjaimanagar, Sivachar had a minister, named Kharavadana, a most wicked tyrant as
ever lived in the world. The thought that the king was without an
heir, and had no hopes of one, awakened in his mind the ambition
of securing for his family the throne of Vañjaimanagar. Sivachar
knew this well. But what could he do. His only care was to send up
additional prayers to frustrate the thoughts of Kharavadana, and to
secure for himself a good position after death, without undergoing
the severe torments of the Put-hell.

At last fortune favoured Sivachar; for what religious man fails to
secure his desire? The king in his sixtieth year had a son. His joy
can better be imagined than described. Lacs (Lakhs) of Brahmans
were fed in honour of the son-birth festival, Putrotsavam, as it
is technically called. The state prisons were opened, and all the
prisoners let loose. Thousands of kine and innumerable acres of
land were offered to Brahmans, and every kind of charity was duly
practised. The ten days of the Sutikagrihavasa (confinement) were
over. On the eleventh day the father saw his much longed-for son's
face, and read on the lines of it great prosperity, learning, valour,
goodness and every excellent quality.

The cradle-swinging, naming, and other ceremonies were duly performed,
and the prince grew up under the great care generally shown to a king's
son. His name the elders fixed as Sundara. Sivachar, who was a very shrewd man, on several occasions, read the
minister's mind, and knew very well how his intentions stood. "This
cruel devil may murder my only son. I care not if he usurps the
throne. What I fear is, that he may murder him. Na daivam Sankarat
param. No other god but Sankara. And he must have his own way. If it
is so written on the prince's head I cannot avoid it." Thus sighed
Sivachar, and this sorrow (soka), made him leaner day by day. Just
ten years after the birth of Sundara, the king fell ill and lay on
his deathbed.

Sivachar had a servant, named Ranavirasing, whom he had all along
observed to be very honest and faithful. That servant the king called
to his side, and asking all others except Sundara, who was weeping
by his father's pillow, to leave the room, addressed him thus:--"My
dear Ranavirasing! I have only a few ghatikas before me. Listen to my
words, and act accordingly. There is one God above us all, who will
punish or reward us according to our bad or good acts. If by avarice
or greed of money you ever play false to the trust that I am going to
repose in you that God will surely punish you. It is not unknown to
you what great difficulties I had in getting this only son, Sundara;
how many temples I built, how many Brahmans I fed, how many religious
austerities I underwent, &c., &c.. God after all gave me a son." Here
his sorrow prevented him from proceeding further, and he began to cry
aloud, and shed tears. "Do not weep on my account, father. We cannot
wipe off what was written on our heads. We must undergo happiness or
misery as is thereon written by Brahma, cried the prince. Ranavirasing
was melted at the sight. He took the boy on his lap, and with his
own upper garment wiped his eyes. The old man continued, "Thus you,
my faithful Ranavirasing, know everything. I now wish that I had
not performed all that I did to get this son. For when I die at this
moment, who is there to take care of him for the next? Kharavadana may
devise plan after plan to remove my boy from this world, and secure
the kingdom for himself. My only hope is in you. I give him into your
hands." Here the aged father, notwithstanding his illness, rose up a
little from his bed, took hold of his son's hand, and after kissing
it for the last time, placed it in Ranavirasing's. "Care not if he
does not get the kingdom. If you only preserve him from the wicked
hands of the minister whom I have all along seen to be covetous of
the throne, you will do a great work for your old master. I make you
from this moment the lord of my palace. From this minute you are
father, mother, brother, servant, and everything to my son. Take
care that you do not betray your trust." Thus ended the king, and
sent at once for the minister. When he came he spoke to him thus,
"Kharavadana! See what I am now. Yesterday I was on the throne. To-day,
in a few minutes, I must breathe my last. Such is the uncertainty of
life. Man's good acts alone follow him to the other world. Take my
signet-ring. Here the king took the ring from off his finger, and gave
it to the minister. Yours is the throne for the present, as long as
the prince is in his minority. Govern well the kingdom. When the prince
attains his sixteenth year kindly give him back the throne. Exercise
a paternal care over him. Find a good and intelligent princess for
his wife." Suddenly, before his speech was quite finished, the king
felt the last pangs of death. The sage-looking minister promised
him everything.

Sivachar breathed his last. After the usual weeping and wailing
of a Hindu funeral, his corpse was burnt to ashes in a sandalwood
pyre. All his queens--and there were several scores--committed sati
Kharavadana then succeeded to the throne of Vañjaimanagar. Ranavirasing
became the lord of the palace, and true to his promise exercised all
care over his trust. He was always at the side of Sundara. That he
might not lose the sweetness of boyhood in study and play, Ranavirasing
brought to the palace twenty gentlemen's sons of good conduct and
learning and made them the prince's fellow-students. A professor
for every branch of learning was employed to teach the prince and
his companions. Sundara thus received a sound and liberal education,
only he was never allowed to go out of the palace. Ranavirasing guarded
him very strictly, and he had every reason to do so. For Kharavadana,
as soon as he became king, had issued a notice that the assassin
of Sundara should have a reward of a karor Sundara reached his sixteenth year. Nothing happened about the
transference of the kingdom; the prince, almost in imprisonment in
the palace, had forgotten everything about the kingdom. Ranavirasing
wished to wait till, as he thought, the prince had acquired better
governing faculties. Thus some time passed.

Full eight years had elapsed from the death of Sivachar. Sundara was
already eighteen, and still he had not received his kingdom. Nothing
was neglected in his education. Though Ranavirasing exercised all
paternal care over him, still it was not to his liking; for he found
in him a great barrier to the pleasures of youth. The only pleasure
for the prince, therefore, was the company of his friends.

One fine evening on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the month of
Vaisakha of the Vasanta These words fell like arrows in the ear of Sundara and troubled
him. Shame that he had been thus treated brought a change of colour
over his face which all his friends perceived, and they felt sorry for
having touched upon the subject. The prince, perceiving that he had
played a woman's part among his friends, resumed or pretended to resume
his former cheerful countenance, and changed the conversation to some
pleasanter topics. They separated very late that night. Before doing
so, Sundara asked them all to present themselves in the durbar hall
The morning came. The friends assembled, as promised the previous
evening. The prince and they, after a light breakfast, mounted their
horses. The horsemen rode in front and behind. The prince with his
friends marched in the middle. Ranavirasing with drawn sword rode
by his side. The party went through the four main streets of the
town. Every one rose up and paid due respect to their old king's
son. When passing through the street where the minister's mansion was,
Ranavirasing perceived that Kharavadana paid no respect to the royal
march. This seemed a most unbearable insult to Ranavirasing. He bit
his lips, gnashed his teeth, and wrung his hands. The prince observed
all the mental pains of his faithful guardian, and laughed to himself
at his simplicity. About mid-day the party returned to the palace. The
friends dispersed, and Sundara after the ceremonies of the new-moon
day had a slight dinner, and retired to rest.

The morning ride was deep in the mind of the prince. Though he laughed
to himself at the simplicity of Ranavirasing when the latter gnashed
his teeth in the morning, the insult had left a stronger and deeper
impression in his heart. The day was almost spent. Sundara took a very
light supper, and shut himself up in his bed-room before the first
watch was quite over. Ranavirasing, as usual, watched outside. The
prince found his wife sound asleep in her bed, and without disturbing
her he went up and down the room. A thread-like substance attracted his
attention in a corner of the bed-chamber. On examination he found it
to be a thread ladder. He had not even time to think how it came into
the bed-chamber. Just then Ranavirasing had retired for a few minutes
to take his supper. "The old fool is off now to eat; and Paramesvara
has thrown this ladder in my way. Let me now escape." Thus thinking,
Sundara came out unobserved by his old guardian, and ascended to the
top of the seventh mansion. From that place he cast his ladder towards
a big tree in the East Main street. On pulling it he found that it was
firmly fixed. "Let me get down, and Paramesvara will assist me." So
praying, before the first watch was over, the prince got down from
his palace, and was in a few minutes in the East street. The severe
watch kept over him by Ranavirasing made it very difficult for him
to go out when he liked, and now by the grace of God, as he thought,
he had escaped that dark new-moon night.

"Life is dear to every one. What can I do if any of the minister's
men find me out now and murder me? Na daivam Sankarat param. No
god but Sankara, and he will now help me." Thus thinking he walked
to the nearest pyal, and lingered there till the bustle of the town
subsided. Nor was it in vain that he stopped there. He overheard while
there the following conversation take place between the master and
mistress of the house at which he lingered:--"Console yourself, my
wife. What shall we do? Fate has so willed it on our heads. May Brahma
There was a Ganesa temple on the way. As it was already drizzling,
the prince went inside till the rain should cease. No sooner had he
entered it than he saw two men, who by their conversation appeared to
be shepherds, coming towards that same temple. They seemed to have
been watching their flocks near an adjacent field, and had come to
shelter themselves from the rain in the temple. Sundara when he saw
them, trembled for his life, and crept in. The shepherds sat down on
the verandah, and taking out their bags began to chew betel-nuts. An
idle lizard began to chirp in a corner. To break the silence, one
said to the other, "Well, Ramakon, I have heard that you are a great
soothsayer and interpreter of bird sounds and lizard speeches. Let me
know what these chirps of the lizard that we heard just now mean. Tell
me." Ramakon replied, "This is news which I would never have revealed
at any other time. But as no fourth person is likely to be here at this
time on a rainy night, let me tell you that the prince of the town is
now lingering here in this temple. So the lizard says. Hence I said,
'no fourth person.' I am glad that no evil hand has yet been tempted,
though such a high price has been set upon his head. The very fact
that he has lived up to this time unhurt in a tiger's domain augurs
well for his future prosperity." Ramakon had scarcely finished his
speech when the idle lizard again made its chit, chit, and Ramakon
now asked his friend, Lakshmanakon, for that was the other's name,
to interpret those sounds. "This has rather a sad meaning for the
prince. The Mantri The feelings of the prince inside were like that of a man who
was being led to the gallows. The bitterest enemy of his life,
the minister himself, was coming to that very place where he was
hiding. "I foolishly accused my old guardian, Ranavirasing, and now
I see his good intentions. How I am to be spared from this calamity
Sankara only knows." Thus thinking, he hurriedly fled to the inmost
part of the temple behind the very image, and sat down there, still
like a stump, without even breathing freely, lest his breath might
reveal him. He had ample time there to admire the sound knowledge of
the shepherds in interpreting the lizard chirps, their simplicity,
their honesty and truthfulness; for, had they been otherwise, they
might at once have caught hold of the prince and made him over to the
tiger minister. True to the interpretation of the second shepherd, a
carriage stopped in front of the Ganesa temple, and there came out of
it the Mantri and the Pradhani. Excepting themselves and, of course,
the carriage driver and, as we know, the prince behind the Ganesa,
there were no others there. Kharavadana and his subordinate chose that
solitary place at the dead of night to hold secret consultations. The
Mantri spoke first, and one could easily perceive from his words that
he was in a fit of anger. "Why should the prince be thus allowed to
ride free through my streets? Of the innumerable servants who eat our
salt was there not one to cut down that impertinent head?" roared the
minister. The Pradhani replied, "My king, my lord, excuse me first
for the humble words that I am going to speak before your honour. We
have taken up a kingdom to which we have no right. If the prince
had demanded the throne two years ago, we ought rightfully to have
returned it to him. He never asked, and we did not restore it. He
never troubles us with demands, but lives like a poor subject of the
crown in his own quarters. Such being the case, why should we kill
him? Why should we murder the only son of our old and much-respected
king Sivachar? What I beg to suggest to your honour is, that we should
no more trouble ourselves about his poor head." The Pradhani, as he
discovered that these words were not to the taste of Kharavadana,
stopped at once without proceeding further, though he had much to
say upon that subject. "Vile wretch! Dare you preach morals to your
superiors. You shall see the result of this, before the morning dawns,"
bawled out the Minister. The Pradhani saw that all his excellent advice
was like blowing a horn in a deaf man's ears. He feared for his own
life, and so at once begged a thousand pardons, and promised to bring
the head of the prince within a week. And as Kharavadana wanted only
that, he spared the Pradhani. They then talked on different subjects,
and prepared to start.

The prince inside, behind the Ganesavigraha, The carriage drove on to the opposite end of the town. It passed the
west gate and entered a big park outside the town. The undaunted prince
followed. In the middle of the park a fine tank was discovered. The
banks looked like day, being lighted up profusely. In the midst of the
tank a small island with a gaudy mansion was seen. Pillars of gold,
sofas of silver and doors of diamonds made it the very Indraloka 
itself. A broad road with avenues of sweet smelling flowering trees
connected the island with the bank. It was at that road that the
carriage stopped. The prince, before that was reached, had got down
and hid himself under the shade of a tree, to see unobserved all that
passed in the mansion which he had every reason to believe was the
destination of the minister. Kharavadana descended from the carriage
and sent the Pradhani home. What most astonished the prince was the
absence of male servants in that garden. At the entrance of the road
twenty young females of the most exquisite beauty waited and conducted
Kharavadana through the sweet bower to the mansion. When it was
reached, the minister sat down on a most richly furnished gold couch,
and ordered the females there to bring the queen. Ten females arranged
themselves on each side of an ivory palanquin, and started, apparently,
to bring the queen in it. "These females themselves resemble Rambha,
These words, of course, fell upon the ears of the prince like
thunder. Before the people there began their search he began his race,
jumped over a high wall, and flew like a kite. Before the lady-racers
and the minister had left their sweet road to the tank-bank, Sundara
found himself in the north street of the town. The news that the
prince was out that night spread like a flame from the pleasure-park
outside throughout the whole town, and before long avaricious persons
were searching in the streets for his valuable head. Sundara thought
it dangerous to pass through the streets, and wished to hide himself
in a safe place. Fortune conducted him to one. It was a ruined old
choultry, where food, during the days of his father, was distributed
in charity to the beggars of the town, and which was now only resorted
to by them to sleep, and not to receive rice. The prince entered it,
and laid himself down in the midst of them, fortunately unobserved. He
could hear from where he was the noise of the persons searching
outside. In the garden the minister searched in vain, and accusing
the female for her wrong interpretation as he thought, retired to bed.

Outside the north gate, at a distance of three ghatikas' walk, lived
a robber. He used to start out on a plundering expedition once in
seven years. In the houses and mansions he used to rob he took only
jewels of various kinds, Gomeda, Unfortunately, that new-moon night happened to be the night of that
cruel robber's plundering expedition. He came out, and when he saw
people in search of the prince, thinking that he was not in his palace,
he wanted to plunder it. Wishing for a coolie, he entered the ruined
choultry, to pick out one among the beggars there. Passing over the
others he came to the prince. He found him stout and strong. "This
beggar will do me good service to-day. I shall break my custom,
and amply reward this man for his services." So thinking to himself,
the gentleman robber tapped Sundara with his cane on the back. The
prince had just closed his eyes. In the short sleep that ensued he
dreamt that the minister's servants were pursuing him, and that
one had caught him. At that very moment the gentleman-robber's
stroke fell upon his back, giving a sort of reality to his dream. He
awoke with horror. "Tell me who you are," asked the unknown person,
"A beggar," was the reply. "How does the night appear to you?" asked
the robber. "As dark as dark can be," replied the prince. The robber
applied a sort of kajjala Meanwhile the robber's daughter, an excellent girl, of the most
charming beauty, overhearing all that took place between her parents,
came running to the cave where the coolie was confined. She pronounced
a single word over the stone lid of the cave, and it opened, and the
prince, who had lost all hopes of recovery, now beheld a beautiful girl
coming towards him. "Whoever you may be, my dear coolie, fly for your
life for the present. You are my husband. My father has so named you,
but as my mother does not like it, he has gone to fetch his weapon to
murder you. Excepting we three, none, not even Brahma, can open the
once-shut gates. After hearing you once called my husband, I must ever
regard you so. Now fly, and escape my father's sharp sword. If you are
a man, marry me in kind remembrance of the assistance rendered. If you
fail to do so you are a beast, and I shall die a virgin." So saying she
conducted out in haste the supposed coolie, who had only time to take a
hasty embrace, whispering in her ear that he was the prince, and that
he would marry her without fail. He now ran for his life. Fearing the
robber would come after him he left the way by which he reached the
cave, and passing through unknown fields reached the south gate of
the town. By that time the search for him had almost abated, and the
prince, praising God for his delivery, reached the south street. The
night was almost spent. Before returning to the palace he wished
to take rest for a few minutes, till he had recovered his breath,
and so he sat down on the pyal of an old and almost ruined house.

That happened to be the house of a poor Brahman, who had not even
sufficient clothes to wear. As the prince sat down in a corner of
the pyal the door of the house opened, and the old Brahman came
out. The old woman, the Brahmani, was standing at the door with a
vessel containing water for her husband. Subhasastri, for that was
the Brahman's name, looked up to the sky for a couple of minutes,
after which he heaved a deep sigh, and said, "Alas, the prince,
the only son of our former protector, Sivachar, is not to remain
for more than two ghatikas. A kalasarpa (black serpent) will sting
him. What shall we do? We are poor. If we could begin Sarpahoma 
now we could tie the mouth of the snake, sacrifice it in the fire,
and thus save the prince." So saying the poor Brahman cried. Sundara,
who overheard everything, jumped down in confusion, and fell at the
feet of the Brahman, who asked him who he was. "I am a herdsman of
the palace. Preserve my master's life," was the reply. Subhasastri
was extremely poor. He had no means to procure a small quantity of
ghi even to begin the homa. Ranavirasing was almost dead. The rumour that the prince was out
reached him. He was astonished at the way in which Sundara had got
out. He searched the whole palace. To his astonishment all the rooms
had previously been opened and plundered. "Has the prince been stolen
away by some vile tricks from the palace," thought Ranavirasing,
and without knowing what to do he was buried in the ocean of sorrow,
from which he gave up all hopes of recovering. What was his joy,
then, when he saw the prince enter the palace just at dawn. "Mai Bab
Chakravarti, where have you been the whole night, throwing away the
advice of your poor slave? How many enemies you have in this world,
you have yet to know," said Ranavirasing. "I know them all now, only
listen to what I say, and do as I bid. I have won the crown without
a blow. Thank the day that gave me you as my protector, for it was
only yesterday that I had ample reason to verify your statements. My
adventures would make your hair stand on end. Thank God I have escaped
from all of them unhurt. If you have a few men ready now, we have won
the kingdom." So saying, the prince explained to him every detail of
his adventure. "If we catch hold of the minister now, we have done
all." "I could never for one moment think that you in a single night
could have seen and done so much. Now that heaven has shown you the
way, I shall obey you," said Ranavirasing, and Sundara accordingly
issued the orders. He described the house with the pyal at which he
had lingered for a while the previous night, and asked a servant to
bring the owner of that house to the Rajasthanik office. Ranavirasing
brought in the Pradhani, who was extremely delighted at the good
intention of the prince. He was offered the Mantri's place. Two were
sent to the shepherds. Twenty were sent to the pleasure-park to have
the minister and his sweet paramour brought to the court in chains. The
female servants were also ordered to be brought. The robber and his
cruel wife were not forgotten. The prince minutely described the
cave, and asked his servants to catch and imprison the robber by
surprising him suddenly, without giving him time to have recourse
to his vile tricks--lock-breaking kajjala, &c. The palace palanquin
was sent for the robber's daughter, whom the prince had firmly made
up his mind to marry. The palace elephants were decked and sent to
fetch with all pomp Subhasastri and his wife to the court. Thus,
without a single stroke, Sundara won the kingdom. Ranavirasing was
thunder-struck by the excellent and bold way in which the prince in
one night went through the series of calamities, and successfully
overcame them all. The Pradhani's delight knew no bounds. He himself
broke open the court and every one connected with the previous night's
adventure was ushered in. The prince bathed, offered up his prayers,
and attended the council. When Subhasastri came in with his wife the
prince put them on the simhasana, 






