WHY BRAHMANS CANNOT EAT IN THE DARK


Among Hindus, especially among Brahmans of the Madras Presidency--and I
now see from personal observation that it is the same in the Bombay
Presidency also--there is a custom, while taking their meals,
of leaving their food uneaten when it so happens that from any
cause the light is blown out. Of course this could occur only in the
night-time. Such mishaps now-a-days take place only in poor families,
sitting down to supper with a single light. Hence the following story,
told as the origin of this custom, is beginning to be forgotten. It
runs as follows:--

In a certain village there lived a Brahman who had an only
daughter. She was deeply read in Sanskrit, and was of the most
charming beauty. He procured a husband for her as deeply read as
herself. The betrothal had already taken place; the muhurta or
auspicious time for her marriage was fixed at the tenth ghatika 
of that night. On that very evening the son-in-law went to a tank
to perform his Sandhya vandana or evening prayers. It swarmed with
crocodiles. People never went near it. The son-in-law, being quite
new to the village, entered the tank without knowing anything of
the danger. Unfortunately, there was none near to warn him. He had
set his foot in the water when a crocodile caught him by the leg,
and began to drag him into the water. That very night was fixed for
his nuptials, and a crocodile was taking him to feast on his flesh. He
was extremely horrified at his position, and said humbly to his enemy,
"My friend crocodile! Listen to my words first, and then decide for
yourself. A wife, the only daughter of an old Brahman, is waiting for
me to-night. If you eat me now, you take me away without my seeing
her, my father-in-law, and other relatives. Their hearts may break
at the news of my death on the very day of the wedding. They may all
curse you. If, on the contrary, you leave me now, I shall go home,
speak to my wife and others about the sad calamity that has come over
me, and after embracing and taking leave of her will come to you
for your supper at the fifteenth ghatika. Till then leave me." The
cruel crocodile, though very fond of human flesh, and himself dying
of hunger, spared him for a few ghatikas at his humble request. After
extracting several oaths from him that he would return in accordance
to his promise, the crocodile went into the water.

The son-in-law also went home. All his joy vanished; how could he be
happy after his promise to the crocodile. Still, to give no uneasiness
to the aged parents of his wife, he underwent all the ceremonies of
the marriage. Only five more ghatikas remained for him to live in the
world, as he thought. He, in a few words, explained everything to his
wife, and asked her permission to leave her. She showed no sign of
sorrow, preached to him about the iron hand of fate, and that he must
undergo what was written on his forehead. She most willingly gave him
permission to go, and he returned to the tank even a ghatika earlier,
and called the crocodile, who came and seized him.

At this moment a certain light glittered before the eyes of the
crocodile and vanished. It was a woman that did it. The wife, after
consoling her husband, and preaching to him about the supremacy of
fate, had accompanied him unobserved with a lighted lamp concealed
in a vessel. Just when the crocodile applied its teeth to the leg of
her husband, she took the lamp out, flashed it before the crocodile's
eyes, and quenched it. Nor was it without its intended effect. The
crocodile left the husband to himself, and said, "You had better go
now; I will never touch you after seeing a lamp extinguished when
I began my meal to-day." The husband was astonished at the device
of his wife, and still more at the faithful observance of a rule in
an unreasonable beast. From that day it was fixed that men, who are
still more reasonable, should never eat when the lamp is blown out.

Another story is told. In a remote village there lived a poor woman,
who laboured from morning till night in different houses, and returned
to her hut with two measures of rice. That quantity would serve
for ten ordinary persons. Being extremely poor, she used to keep no
lamp, but cook her rice in the dark, only guided by the light of the
fire. When she sat down for her meal even the light of the fire faded;
so she had to eat in the dark. Though she used the full two measures of
rice that she brought away every day, her hunger was never satisfied;
she was always in extreme want.

Now it so happened that she had a younger sister, who was somewhat
richer than herself. The younger came to see her elder sister. The
former never used to be without a light, and so asked her sister to
buy some oil that night and light a lamp. The elder was compelled by
necessity to do so; for that, she devoted a portion of her two measures
of rice, and returned home with great uneasiness and perplexity of mind
as to how less than two measures would furnish their supper that night,
while full two measures were found insufficient on former occasions
for herself alone. The lamp was set for the first time in her house,
and she cooked the remaining rice. The younger sister was astonished
to see her using so much for two. The elder, thinking within herself
that the younger would soon see her mistake, cooked everything. Two
leaves were spread, and they sat down to their supper. 






