MARY, MARY, SO CONTRARY!



There was once a farmer who was married to the most contrary wife in
the world. Her name was Maya. If he expected Maya to say, "Yes," she
would always say, "No," and if he expected her to say, "No," she would
always say, "Yes." If he said the soup was too hot, Maya would
instantly insist that it was too cold. She would do nothing that he
wanted her to do, and she always insisted on doing everything that he
did not want her to do.

Like most contrary people Maya was really very stupid and the farmer
after he had been married to her for a few years knew exactly how to
manage her.

For instance at Christmas one year he wanted to make a big feast for
his friends and neighbors. Did he tell his wife so? Not he! Instead, a
few weeks beforehand he remarked casually:

"Christmas is coming and I suppose every one will expect us to have
fine white bread. But I don't think we ought to. It's too expensive.
Black bread is good enough for us."

"Black bread, indeed!" cried Maya. "Not at all! We're going to have
white bread and you needn't say any more about it! Black bread at
Christmas! To hear you talk people would suppose we are beggars!"

The farmer pretended to be grieved and he said:

"Well, my dear, have white bread if your heart is set on it, but I
hope you don't expect to make any pies."

"Not make any pies! Just let me tell you I expect to make all the pies
I want!"

"Well, now, Maya, if we have pies I don't think we ought to have any
wine."

"No wine! I like that! Of course we'll have wine on Christmas!"

The farmer was much pleased but, still pretending to protest, he said:

"Well, if we spend money on wine, we better not expect to buy any
coffee."

"What! No coffee on Christmas! Who ever heard of such a thing! Of
course we'll have coffee!"

"Well, I'm not going to quarrel with you! Get a little coffee if you
like, but just enough for you and me for I don't think we ought to
have any guests."

"What! No guests on Christmas! Indeed and you're wrong if you think
we're not going to have a houseful of guests!"

The farmer was overjoyed but, still pretending to grumble, he said:

"If you have the house full of people, you needn't think I'm going to
sit at the head of the table, for I'm not!"

"You are, too!" screamed his wife. "That's exactly where you are going
to sit!"

"Maya, Maya, don't get so excited! I will sit there if you insist. But
if I do you mustn't expect me to pour the wine."

"And why not? It would be a strange thing if you didn't pour the wine
at your own table!"

"All right, all right, I'll pour it! But you mustn't expect me to
taste it beforehand."

"Of course you're going to taste it beforehand!"

This was exactly what the farmer wanted his wife to say. So you see by
pretending to oppose her at every turn he was able to have the big
Christmas party that he wanted and he was able to feast to his heart's
content with all his friends and relatives and neighbors.

Time went by and Maya grew more and more contrary if such a thing were
possible. Summer came and the haymaking season. They were going to a
distant meadow to toss hay and had to cross an angry little river on a
footbridge made of one slender plank.

The farmer crossed in safety, then he called back to his wife:

"Walk very carefully, Maya, for the plank is not strong!"

"I will not walk carefully!" the wife declared.

She flung herself on the plank with all her weight and when she got to
the middle of the stream she jumped up and down just to show her
husband how contrary she could be. Well, the plank broke with a snap,
Maya fell into the water, the current carried her off, and she was
drowned!

Her husband, seeing what had happened, ran madly upstream shouting:

"Help! Help!"

The haymakers heard him and came running to see what was the matter.

"My wife has fallen into the river!" he cried, "and the current has
carried her body away!"

"What ails you?" the haymakers said. "Are you mad? If the current has
carried your wife away, she's floating downstream, not upstream!"

"Any other woman would float downstream," the farmer said. "Yes! But
you know Maya! She's so contrary she'd float upstream every time!"

"That's true," the haymakers said, "she would!"

So all afternoon the farmer searched upstream for his wife's body but
he never found it.

When night came he went home and had a good supper of all the things
he liked to eat which Maya would never let him have.


  

JANE, JANE, DON'T COMPLAIN!



There was once a man who was poor and lazy and he had a wife who was
even worse. Her name was Jenny. Jenny was so lazy that it was an
effort for her to lift one foot after the other. And in addition to
her laziness she was an everlasting complainer. "Oh!" she used to
grunt in the morning, "I wish we didn't have to get up!" and "Oh!" she
used to groan at night, "I wish we didn't have to take our shoes off
before going to bed!"

One day when they were both out in the forest collecting faggots,
Jenny said:

"I don't see why we're not rich! I don't see why the King should live
at his ease while we have to grub for everything we get! I just hate
work!"

Of course the trouble both with Jenny and her husband was not that
they worked but that they didn't work. It was because they didn't that
they had so much time to think about it.

"Drat it all!" Jenny went on, whining, "Adam and Eve are to blame for
all our misfortunes! If they hadn't disobeyed God's commandment and
eaten that apple, we'd all be living in the Garden of Eden to this
day! It's all their fault that we have to moil and toil and hurry and
scurry!"

"Yes," the man agreed, "it is, especially Eve's. Of course Adam was to
blame, too, for he should have controlled his wife better. But Eve was
the more to blame. If I had been Adam I shouldn't have allowed her to
touch the apple in the first place."

Now it happened that the King who was out hunting that day overheard
this conversation.

"Ha!" he thought to himself, "I've a great mind to teach these two
people a lesson!"

He pushed aside the bushes that had hidden him from them and said:

"Good day to you both! I have just heard your complaints and I, too,
think it very hard that you should be poor while others are rich. I
tell you what I'll do: I'll take you both home with me to the castle
and maintain you in ease and luxury provided you obey me in just one
thing."

Jenny and her husband agreed to this eagerly and just as they were the
King took them home with him to the castle. He lodged them in a room
with golden furniture, he gave them fine clothes to wear, and for food
he had them served the choicest delicacies in the world.

As they sat eating their first royal meal, he came in to them carrying
in his hands a covered dish of silver. He put the dish down in the
center of the table.

"Now, my friends," he said, "I promised to maintain you in this ease
and luxury provided you obeyed me in one thing. You see this silver
dish. I forbid you ever to lift the cover. If you disobey me, that
moment I shall take from you your fine clothes and send you back to
your poverty and misery."

With that the King left them and they stuffed themselves to their
hearts' content with the delicate foods set before them.

They were so busy, eating and drinking and admiring themselves in
their fine clothes, that for the first day they didn't give the
covered dish a thought. The second day the wife noticed it and said:

"That's the thing we're not to touch. Well, for my part I don't want
to touch it. I don't want to do anything but eat and sleep and try on
my pretty new clothes."

By the third day they had eaten so much and so steadily that they
were no longer hungry and when they lay down on the big soft bed they
no longer fell instantly asleep.

"Dear me," Jenny began whining, "I don't know what's the matter with
this food! It doesn't taste as good as it used to! Maybe the cook has
grown careless! I think we ought to complain to the King. I'm
beginning to feel very uncomfortable and I haven't any appetite at
all! I wonder what's in that covered dish. Perhaps it's something to
eat, something perfectly delicious! I've half a mind to lift the cover
and see."

"Now just you leave that silver dish alone!" the man growled. He, too,
had been eating too much and was feeling peevish. "Don't you remember
what the King said?"

"Pooh!" cried Jenny. "What do I care what the King said! I think he
was just poking fun at us telling us we mustn't lift the cover of that
silver dish. After all a dish is a dish and it's no crime to lift a
cover even if it is made of silver!"

With that Jenny jumped up and before her husband could stop her she
lifted the forbidden cover. Instantly a little white mouse hopped out
of the silver dish and scurried away.

"Oh!" Jenny screamed, dropping the cover with a great clatter.

The King who was in an adjoining chamber heard the noise and came in.

"So!" he said, "you have done the one thing that I told you not to do!
You haven't been here three days and although you've had everything
that heart could wish for yet you couldn't obey me in this one little
matter!"

"Your Majesty," the man said, "it was my wife who did it, not I."

"No matter," the King said, "you, too, are to blame. If you had
restrained her it wouldn't have happened."

Then he called his servants and had them strip off the fine clothes
and dress the couple again in their old rags.

"Now," he said as he drove them from the castle gates, "never again
blame Adam and Eve for the misfortunes which you bring upon
yourselves!"



