LEGEND OF THE CALLE DE LA MACHINCUEPA


Naturally, Senor, this matter which gave its name to the Calle de la
Machincuepa created a scandal that set all the tongues in the City to
buzzing about it: every one, of course, blaming the young lady--even
though she did it to win such vast riches--for committing so publicly
so great an impropriety; but some holding that a greater blame
attached to the Marques, her uncle, for punishing her--no matter how
much she deserved punishment--by making her inheritance depend upon so
strange and so outrageous a condition; and some even saying that the
greatest blame of all rested upon the Viceroy: because he did not
forbid an indecorum that was planned to--and that did--take place in
the Plaza Mayor directly in front of his Palace, and so beneath his
very nose. For myself, Senor, I think that the young lady deserved
more blame than anybody: because she was free to make her own choice
in the matter, and that she chose riches rather than propriety very
clearly proved--though that, to be sure, was known before she did her
choosing--that she had a bad heart. As the Viceroy who did not forbid
that young lady to do what she did do was the Duque de Linares--who,
as you know, Senor, took up the duties of his high office in the year
1714--you will perceive that the curious event about which I now am
telling you occurred very nearly two full centuries ago.

At that time there lived in the street that ever since that time has
been called the Street of the Machincuepa a very rich and a very noble
Spanish gentleman whose name was Don Mendo Quiroga y Saurez, and whose
title was Marques del Valle Salado. In his beginning he was neither
rich nor noble, and not even of good blood: having been begotten by an
unknown father and born of an unknown mother; and having in his young
manhood gone afloat out of Spain as a common sailor to seek his
fortune on the sea. What he did upon the sea was a matter that his
teeth guarded his tongue from talking about in his later years: but it
was known generally that--while in appearance he and his ship had been
engaged in the respectable business of bringing slaves from Africa to
the colonies--his real business had been that of a corsair; and that
on his murdering piracies the corner-stone of his great fortune had
been laid.

Having in that objectionable manner accumulated a whole ship-load of
money, and being arrived at an age when so bustling a life was
distasteful to him, he came to Mexico; and, being come here, he bought
with his ship-load of money the Valle Salado: and there he set up
great salt-works out of which he coined more gold--knowing well how to
grease the palms of those in the Government who could be of service to
him--than could be guessed at even in a dream. Therefore it was known
with certainty that he possessed a fortune of precisely three millions
and a half of dollars--which is a greater sum, Senor, than a hundred
men could count in a whole month of summer days. And of his millions
he sent to the King such magnificent presents that the King, in simple
justice to him, had to reward him; and so the King made him a
marques--and he was the Marques del Valle Salado from that time on.

Therefore--being so very rich, and a marques--his sea-murderings of
his younger days, and his sea-stealings that made the corner-stone of
his great fortune, were the very last things which his teeth suffered
his tongue to talk about: and he lived with a great magnificence a
life that caused much scandal, and he was generally esteemed and
respected, and because of his charities he was beloved by all the
poor.

As old age began to creep upon this good gentleman, Senor, and with it
the infirmities that came of his loose way of living, he found himself
in the world lonely: because, you see--never having perceived any
necessity for marrying--he had no wife to care for him, nor children
whose duty it was to minister to his needs. Therefore--his brother in
Spain about that time dying, and leaving a daughter behind him--he
brought from Spain his dead brother's daughter, whom he put at the
head of his magnificent household, and equally confided himself in his
infirmity to her care. And, that she might be repaid for her care of
him, he heaped upon her every possible luxury and splendor that his
great riches could procure.

The name of this young lady, Senor, was Dona Paz de Quiroga; and the
position to which she was raised by Don Mendo's munificence--and all
the more because she was raised to it from the depths of poverty--was
very much to her mind. Dona Paz was of a great beauty that well became
the rich clothing and the rich jewels that her uncle lavished upon
her; and what with her beauty, and her finery, and her recognized
nobility as the lawful inheritor of her uncle's title, she knew
herself to be--and made no bones of asserting herself to be--the very
greatest lady at the Viceroy's court. She was of a jealous and
rancorous disposition, and very charitable, and excessively selfish,
and her pride was beyond all words. Every one of the young men in the
City immediately fell in love with her; and she won also the respect
of the most eminent clerics and the homage of the very greatest nobles
of the court. So nice was her sense of her own dignity that even in
the privacy of her own household her conduct at all times was marked
by a rigorous elegance; and in public she carried herself with a grave
stateliness that would have befitted a queen.

But this young lady had a bad heart, Senor, as I have already
mentioned; and toward Don Mendo, to whom she owed everything, she did
not behave well at all. So far from ministering to him in his
infirmities, she left him wholly to the care of hired servants; when
she made her rare visits to his sick-room she carried always a scented
kerchief, and held it to her nose closely--telling him that the smell
of balsams and of plasters was distasteful to her; and never, by any
chance whatever, did she give him one single kind look or kind word.
As was most natural, Don Mendo did not like the way that Dona Paz
treated him: therefore, in the inside of him, he made his mind up that
he would pay her for it in the end. And in the end he did pay her for
it: as she found out when, on a day, that worthy old man was called to
go to heaven and they came to read his will.

Dona Paz listened to the reading of the will with the greatest
satisfaction, Senor, until the reading got to the very end of it:
because Don Mendo uniformly styled her his beloved niece--which
somewhat surprised her--and in plain words directed that every one of
his three millions and a half of dollars should be hers. But at the
very end of the will a condition was made that had to be fulfilled
before she could touch so much as a tlaco of her great inheritance:
and that condition was so monstrous--and all the more monstrous
because Dona Paz was so rigorously elegant in all her doings, and so
respectful of her own dignity--that the mere naming of it almost
suffocated her with fright and shame.

And, really, Senor, that Dona Paz felt that way about it is not be
wondered at, because what Don Mendo put at the very end of his will
was this: "So to Paz, my beloved niece, I leave the whole of my
possessions; but only in case that she comply precisely with the
condition that I now lay upon her. And the condition that I now lay
upon her is this: That, being dressed in her richest ball dress, and
wearing her most magnificent jewels, she shall go in an open coach to
the Plaza Mayor at noonday; and that, being come to the Plaza Mayor,
she shall walk to the very middle of it; and that there, in the very
middle of it, she shall bow her head to the ground; and that then, so
bowing, she shall make the turn which among the common people of
Mexico is called a 'machincuepa.' And it is my will that if my
beloved niece Paz does not comply precisely with this condition,
within six months from the day on which I pass out of life, then the
whole of my possessions shall be divided into two equal parts: of
which one part shall belong to the Convent of Nuestra Senora de la
Merced, and the other part shall belong to the Convent of San
Francisco; and of my possessions my beloved niece Paz shall have no
part at all. And this condition I lay upon my beloved niece Paz that,
in the bitterness of the shame of it, she may taste a little of the
bitterness with which her cruelties have filled my dying years."

Well, Senor, you may fancy the state that that most proud and most
dignified young lady was in when she knew the terms on which alone her
riches would come to her! And as to making her mind up in such a case,
she found it quite impossible. On the one side, she would say to
herself that what was required of her to win her inheritance would be
done, and done with, in no more than a moment; and that then and
always--being rich beyond dreaming, and in her own right a
marquesa--she would be the greatest lady in the whole of New Spain.
And then, on the other side, she would say to herself that precisely
because of her great wealth and her title she would be all the more
sneered at for descending to an act so scandalous; and that if she did
descend to that act she would be known as the Marquesa de la
Machincuepa to the end of her days. And what to do, Senor, she did not
know at all. And as time went on and on, and she did not do anything,
the Mercedarios and the Franciscanos--being always more and more sure
that they would share between them Don Mendo's great fortune--talked
pleasantly about new altars in their churches and new comforts in
their convents: and as they talked they rubbed their hands.

And so it came to the very last day of the six months that Don Mendo
had given to Dona Paz in which to make her mind up; and the morning
hours of that day went slipping past, and of Dona Paz the crowds that
filled the streets and the Plaza Mayor saw nothing; and the
Mercedarios and the Franciscanos all had smiling faces--being at last
entirely certain that Don Mendo's millions of dollars would be
theirs.

And then, Senor, just as the Palace clock was striking the half hour
past eleven, the great doors of Don Mendo's house were opened; and out
through the doorway came an open coach in which Dona Paz was seated,
dressed in her richest ball dress and wearing the most magnificent of
her jewels; and Dona Paz, pale as a dead woman, drove through the
crowds on the streets and into the crowd on the Plaza Mayor; and then
she walked, the crowd making way for her, to the very middle of
it--where her servants had laid a rich carpet for her; and there, as
the Palace clock struck twelve--complying precisely with Don Mendo's
condition--Dona Paz bowed her head to the ground; and then, so bowing,
she made the turn which among the common people of Mexico is called a
machincuepa! So did Dona Paz win for herself Don Mendo's millions of
dollars: and so did come into the soul of her the bitterness of shame
that Don Mendo meant should come into it--in reward for the bitterness
with which her cruelties had filled his dying years!

What became of this young lady--who so sacrificed propriety in order
to gain riches--I never have heard mentioned: but it is certain that
the street in which she lived immediately got the name of the Street
of the Machincuepa--and the exact truth of every detail of this
curious story is attested by the fact that that is its name now.

Perhaps the meaning of this word machincuepa, Senor--being, as Don
Mendo said in his will, a word in use among the common people of
Mexico--is unknown to you. The meaning of it, in good Spanish, is
salto mortal--only it means more. And it was precisely that sort of an
excessive somersault--there in the middle of the crowded Plaza Mayor
at noonday--that the most proud and the most dignified Dona Paz
turned!




