LEGEND OF THE CALLE DE LA QUEMADA


Not knowing what they are talking about, Senor, many people will tell
you that the Street of the Burned Woman got its name because--in the
times when the Holy Office was helping the goodness of good people by
making things very bad for the bad ones--a woman heretic most properly
and satisfactorily was burned there. Such is not in the least the
case. The Quemadero of the Inquisition--where such sinners were
burned, that their sins might be burned out of them--was nowhere near
the Calle de la Quemada: being at the western end of what now is the
Alameda, in quite a different part of the town. Therefore it is a
mistake to mix these matters: and the real truth is that this
beautiful young lady did herself destroy her own beauty by setting
fire to it; and she did it because she wanted to do it--that in that
way she might settle some doubts which were in her heart. It all
happened in the time of the good Viceroy Don Luis de Velasco: and so
you will perceive, Senor, that this story is more than three hundred
years old.

The name of this beautiful young lady who went to such lengths for her
heart's assuring was Dona Beatrice de Espinosa; and the name of her
father was Don Gonzalo de Espinosa y Guevra--who was a Spanish rich
merchant who came to make himself still richer by his buyings and his
sellings in New Spain. Being arrived here, he took up his abode in a
fine dwelling in the quarter of San Pablo, in the very street that now
is called the Street of the Burned Woman because of what presently
happened there; and if that street was called by some other name
before that cruel happening I do not know what it was.

Dona Beatrice was as beautiful, Senor, as the full moon and the best
of the stars put together; and she was more virtuous than she was
beautiful; and she was just twenty years old. Therefore all the young
gentlemen of the City immediately fell in love with her; and great
numbers of the richest and the noblest of them--their parents, or
other suitable persons, making the request for them--asked her
father's permission to wed her: so that Dona Beatrice might have had
any one of twenty good husbands, had any one of them been to her mind.
However--being a lady very particular in the matter of husbands--not
one of them was to her liking: wherefore her father did as she wanted
him to do and refused them all.

But, on a day, matters went differently. At a great ball given by the
Viceroy in the Palace Dona Beatrice found what her heart had been
waiting for: and this was a noble Italian young gentleman who
instantly--as all the others had done--fell in love with her; and with
whom--as she never before had done with anybody--she instantly fell in
love. The name of this young gentleman was Don Martin Scipoli; and he
was the Marques de Pinamonte y Frantescello; and he was as handsome as
he was lovable, and of a most jealous nature, and as quarrelsome as it
was possible for anybody to be. Therefore, as I have said, Senor, Dona
Beatrice at once fell in love with him with all the heart of her; and
Don Martin at once fell in love with her also: and so violently that
his jealousy of all her other lovers set off his quarrelsomeness at
such a rate that he did nothing--in his spare time, when he was not
making love to Dona Beatrice--but affront and anger them, so that he
might have the pleasure of finding them at the point of his sword.

Now Dona Beatrice, Senor, was a young lady of a most delicate nature,
and her notions about love were precisely the same as those which are
entertained by the lady angels. Therefore Don Martin's continual
fightings very much worried her: raising in her heart the dread that
so violent a person must be of a coarse and carnal nature; and that,
being of such a nature, his love for her came only from his
beblindment by the outside beauty of her, and was not--as her own love
was--the pure love of soul for soul. Moreover, she was pained by his
being led on by his jealousy--for which there was no just occasion--to
injure seriously, and even mortally, so many worthy young men.

Therefore Dona Beatrice--after much thinking and a great deal of
praying over the matter--made her mind up to destroy her own beauty:
that in that way she might put all jealousies out of the question;
and at the same time prove to her heart's satisfying that Don Martin's
love for her had nothing to do with the outside beauty of her and
truly was the pure love of soul for soul.

And Dona Beatrice, Senor, did do that very thing. Her father being
gone abroad from his home, and all of the servants of the house being
on one excuse or another sent out of it, she brought into her own
chamber a brazier filled with burning coals; and this she set beneath
an image of the blessed Santa Lucia that she had hung upon the wall to
give strength to her in case, in doing herself so cruel an injury, her
own strength should fail. Santa Lucia, as you will remember, Senor,
with her own hands plucked out her own wonderfully beautiful eyes and
sent them on a platter to the young gentleman who had troubled her
devotions by telling her that he could not live without them; and with
them sent the message that, since she had given him the eyes that he
could not live without, he please would let her and her devotions
alone. Therefore it was clear that Santa Lucia was the saint best
fitted to oversee the matter that Dona Beatrice had in hand.

But in regard to her eyes Dona Beatrice did not precisely pattern
herself upon Santa Lucia: knowing that without them she could not see
how Don Martin stood the test that she meant to put him to; and, also,
very likely remembering that Santa Lucia miraculously got her eyes
back again, and got them back even more beautiful than when she lost
them: because, you see, they came back filled with the light of
heaven--where the angels had been taking care of them until they
should be returned. Therefore Dona Beatrice bound a wet handkerchief
over her eyes--that she might keep the sight in them to see how Don
Martin stood his testing; and, also, that she might spare the angels
the inconvenience of caring for them--and then she fanned and fanned
the fire in the brazier until the purring of it made her know that the
coals were in a fierce blaze. And then, Senor, she plunged her
beautiful face down into the very heart of the glowing coals! And it
was at that same instant--though Dona Beatrice, of course, did not
know about that part of the matter--that the Street of the Burned
Woman got its name.

Being managed under the guidance and with the approval of Santa Lucia,
the cruelty that this virtuous young lady put upon her own beauty
could lead only to a good end. Presently, when the bitter pain of her
burning had passed a little, Dona Beatrice bade Don Martin come to
her; and he, coming, found her clad in virgin white and wearing over
her poor burned face a white veil. And then the test that Dona
Beatrice had planned for her heart's assuring was made.

Little by little, Dona Beatrice raised her white veil slowly; and,
little by little, Don Martin saw the face of her: and the face of her
was more shudderingly hideous--her two beautiful eyes perfectly alight
and alive amid that distorted deathliness was what made the shudder of
it--than anything that ever he had dreamed of in his very worst dream!
Therefore, with a great joy and thankfulness, Don Martin immediately
espoused Dona Beatrice: and thence-forward and always--most reasonably
ceasing to love the outside beauty of her--gave her, as she wanted him
to give her, the pure love of soul for soul.

For myself, Senor, I think that the conduct of that young lady was
unreasonable, and that Don Martin had just occasion to be annoyed.




