LEGEND OF THE PUENTE DEL CLERIGO


This priest who was murdered and thrown over the bridge, Senor, was a
very good man, and there was very little excuse for murdering him.
Moreover, he belonged to a most respectable family, and so did the
gentleman who murdered him, and so did the young lady; and because of
all that, and because at the best of times the killing of a priest is
sacrilege, the scandal of that murder made a stir in the whole town.

At that time--it was some hundreds of years ago, Senor--there lived in
the street that now is called, because of it all, the street of the
Puente del Clerigo, a very beautiful young lady who was named Dona
Margarita Jauregui. And she, being an orphan, dwelt with her uncle,
this priest: who was named Don Juan de Nava and was a person of rank,
being a caballero of the orders of Santiago and Calatrava. In those
days there were few houses upon that street, which was the causeway
between the City and the Indian town of Tlaltelolco; and for the
greater safety of the Spaniards dwelling in the City there was a wide
ditch, that this bridge crossed, between them and the Indian town.
Long ago, Senor, Tlaltelolco became a part of the City; and the ditch,
and the bridge over it, are gone.

Now it happened that at the court of the Viceroy was a noble young
Portuguese gentleman, who had great riches and two titles, named Don
Duarte de Sarraza; and the Viceroy, who was the Conde de Salvatierra,
very much esteemed him because he was of a loyal nature and of good
heart. Therefore this noble young gentleman fell in love with Dona
Margarita, and she with him; but her uncle, the Padre Don Juan,
knowing that Don Duarte was a vicious young man--a gambler, and in
other ways what he should not have been--forbade his niece to have
anything to do with him. So things rested for a while on those terms,
and Don Duarte did not like it at all.

Well, it happened on a night, Senor, that Don Duarte was at the window
of Dona Margarita, telling his love for her through the grating; and
while he was so engaged he saw Padre Don Juan coming home along the
causeway by the light of the stars. Then that wicked young man went to
where the bridge was, and when the Padre was come to the bridge he
sprang upon him and drove his dagger deep into his skull. The dagger
was nailed so fast there, Senor, that he could not drag it loose
again; and so he bundled the dead priest over the wall of the bridge
and into the water with the dagger still sticking in the skull of him;
and then he went his way to his home.

Not wishing to have it thought that he had committed that murder, Don
Duarte did not go near Dona Margarita for almost a whole year. And
then--because his love for her would not suffer him to wait away from
her longer--he went in the night-time to meet her once more at her
window; and he had in his heart the wicked purpose to make her come
out to him, and then to carry her off.

That did not happen--and what did happen is a terrible mystery. All
that is known about it is this: Very early in the morning the
neighbors living thereabout found Don Duarte dead on the Bridge of the
Cleric; and holding him fast, a bony knee on his breast and two bony
hands at his throat strangling him, was a skeleton. And the skeleton,
Senor, was dressed in a black cassock, such as only clerics wear, and
in the skull of it a rusty dagger was nailed fast. Therefore it became
generally known that Don Duarte had murdered the Padre Don Juan; and
that the skeleton of the Padre Don Juan had killed Don Duarte in just
revenge.




