LEGEND OF THE LIVING SPECTRE


Apparitions of dead people, Senor, of course are numerous and
frequent. I myself--as on other occasions I have mentioned to
you--have seen several spectres, and so have various of my friends.
But this spectre of which I now am telling you--that appeared on the
Plaza Mayor at noonday, and was seen by everybody--was altogether out
of the ordinary: being not in the least a dead person, but a person
who wore his own flesh and bones in the usual manner and was alive in
them; yet who certainly was walking and talking here on the Plaza
Mayor of this City of Mexico in the very self-same moment that he also
was walking and talking in a most remote and wholly different part of
the world. Therefore--in spite of his wearing his own flesh and bones
in the usual manner and being alive in them--it was certain that he
was a spectre: because it was certain that his journeying could have
been made only on devils' wings. The day on which this marvel
happened is known most exactly: because it happened on the day after
the day that the Governor of the Filipinas, Don Gomez Perez
Dasmarinas, had his head murderously split open, and died of it, in
the Molucca Islands; and that gentleman was killed in that bad manner
on the 25th of October in the year 1593. Therefore--since everything
concerning this most extraordinary happening is known with so great an
accuracy--there can be no doubt whatever but that in every particular
all that I now am telling you is strictly true.

Because it began in two different places at the same time, it is not
easy to say certainly, Senor, which end of this story is the beginning
of it; but the beginning of it is this: On a day, being the day that I
have just named to you, the sentries on guard at the great doors of
the Palace--and also the people who at that time happened to be
walking near by on the Plaza Mayor--of a sudden saw an entirely
strange sentry pacing his beat before the great doors of the Palace
quite in the regular manner: marching back and forth, with his gun on
his shoulder; making his turns with a soldierly propriety; saluting
correctly those entitled to salutes who passed him; and in every way
conducting himself as though he duly had been posted there--but making
his marchings and his turnings and his salutings with a wondering look
on the face of him, and having the air of one who is all bedazzled and
bemazed.

What made every one know that he was a stranger in this City was that
the uniform which he wore was of a wholly different cut and fabric
from that belonging to any regiment at that time quartered here:
being, in fact--as was perceived by one of the sentries who had served
in the Filipinas--the uniform worn in Manila by the Palace Guard. He
was a man of forty, or thereabouts; well set up and sturdy; and he had
the assured carriage--even in his bedazzlement and bemazement--of an
old soldier who had seen much campaigning, and who could take care of
himself through any adventure in which he might happen to land.
Moreover, his talk--when the time came for him to explain
himself--went with a devil-may-care touch to it that showed him to be
a man who even with witches and demons was quite ready to hold his
own.

His explanation of himself, of course, was not long in coming: because
the Captain of the Guard at once was sent for; and when the Captain of
the Guard came he asked the stranger sentry most sharply what his name
was, and where he came from, and what he was doing on a post to which
he had not been assigned.

To these questions the stranger sentry made answer--speaking with an
easy confidence, and not in the least ruffled by the Captain's
sharpness with him--that his name was Gil Perez; that he came from the
Filipinas; and that what he was doing was his duty as near as he could
come to it: because he had been duly detailed to stand sentry that
morning before the Governor's Palace--and although this was not the
Governor's Palace before which he had been posted it certainly was a
governor's palace, and that he therefore was doing the best that he
could do. And to these very curious statements he added--quite
casually, as though referring to an ordinary matter of current
interest--that the Governor of the Filipinas, Don Gomez Perez
Dasmarinas, had had his head murderously split open, and was dead of
it, in the Molucca Islands the evening before.

Well, Senor, you may fancy what a nest of wasps was let loose when
this Gil Perez gave to the Captain of the Guard so incredible an
account of himself; and, on top of it, told that the Governor of the
Filipinas had been badly killed on the previous evening in islands in
the Pacific Ocean thousands and thousands of miles away! It was a
matter that the Viceroy himself had to look into. Therefore before the
Viceroy--who at that time was the good Don Luis de Velasco--Gil Perez
was brought in a hurry: and to the Viceroy he told over again just the
same story, in just the same cool manner, and in just the same words.

Very naturally, the Viceroy put a great many keen questions to him;
and to those questions he gave his answers--or said plainly that he
could not give any answers--with the assured air of an old soldier who
would not lightly suffer his word to be doubted even by a Viceroy; and
who was ready, in dealing with persons of less consequence, to make
good his sayings with his fists or with his sword.

In part, his explanation of himself was straightforward and
satisfactory. What he told about the regiment to which he belonged was
known to be true; and equally known to be true was much of what he
told--being in accord with the news brought thence by the latest
galleon--about affairs in the Filipinas. But when it came to
explaining the main matter--how he had been shifted across the ocean
and the earth, and all in a single moment, from his guard-mount before
the Governor's Palace in Manila to his guard-mount before the
Viceroy's Palace in the City of Mexico--Gil Perez was at a stand. How
that strange thing had happened, he said, he knew no more than Don
Luis himself knew. All that he could be sure of was that it _had_
happened: because, certainly, only a half hour earlier he had been in
Manila; and now, just as certainly, he was in the City of Mexico--as
his lordship the Viceroy could see plainly with his own eyes. As to
the even greater marvel--how he knew that on the previous evening the
Governor of the Filipinas had had his head murderously split open, and
was dead of it, in the Molucca Islands--he said quite freely that he
did not in the least know how he knew it. What alone he could be sure
of, he said, was that in his heart he did know that Don Gomez had
been killed on the previous evening in that bad manner; and he very
stoutly asserted that the truth of what he told would be clear to Don
Luis, and to everybody, when the news of the killing of Don Gomez had
had time to get to Mexico in the ordinary way.

And then Gil Perez--having answered all of the Viceroy's questions
which he could answer, and having said all that he had to say--stood
quite at his ease before the Viceroy: with his feet firmly planted,
and his right hand on his hip, and his right arm akimbo--and so waited
for whatever might happen to be the next turn.

Well, Senor, the one thing of which anybody really could be sure in
this amazing matter--and of which, of course, everybody was sure--was
that the devil was at both the bottom and the top of it; and, also,
there seemed to be very good ground for believing that Gil Perez was
in much closer touch with the devil than any good Christian--even
though he were an old soldier, and not much in the way of Christianity
expected of him--had any right to be. Therefore the Viceroy rid
himself of an affair that was much the same to him as a basket of
nettles by turning Gil Perez over to the Holy Office--and off he was
carried to Santo Domingo and clapped into one of the strongest cells.

Most men, of course, on finding themselves that way in the clutches of
the Inquisition, would have had all the insides of them filled with
terror; but Gil Perez, Senor--being, as I have mentioned, an old
campaigner--took it all as it came along to him and was not one bit
disturbed. He said cheerfully that many times in the course of his
soldiering he had been in much worse places; and added that--having a
good roof over his head, and quite fair rations, and instead of
marching and fighting only to sit at his ease and enjoy himself--he
really was getting, for once in his life, as much of clear comfort as
any old soldier had a right to expect would come his way. Moreover, in
his dealings with the Familiars of the Holy Office his conduct was
exemplary. He stuck firmly to his assertion that--whatever the devil
might have had to do with him--he never had had anything to do with
the devil; he seemed to take a real pleasure in confessing as many of
his sins as he conveniently could remember; and in every way that was
open to him his conduct was that of quite as good a Christian as any
old soldier reasonably could be expected to be.

Therefore--while he staid on in his cell very contentedly--the
Familiars of the Holy Office put their heads together and puzzled and
puzzled as to what they should do with him: because it certainly
seemed as though the devil, to suit his own devilish purposes, simply
had made a convenience of Gil Perez without getting his consent in the
matter; and so it did not seem quite fair--in the face of his protest
that he was as much annoyed as anybody was by what the devil had done
with him--to put him into a flame-covered sanbenito, and to march him
off to be burned for a sorcerer at the next auto de fe. Therefore the
Familiars of the Holy Office kept on putting their heads together and
puzzling and puzzling as to what they should do with him; and Gil
Perez kept on enjoying himself in his cell in Santo Domingo--and so
the months went on and on.

And then, on a day, a new turn was given to the whole matter: when
the galleon from the Filipinas arrived at Acapulco and brought with it
the proof that every word that Gil Perez had spoken was true. Because
the galleon brought the news that Don Gomez Perez Dasmarinas--the crew
of the ship that he was on having mutinied--really had had his head
murderously split open, and was dead of it, in the Molucca Islands;
and that this bad happening had come to him at the very time that Gil
Perez had named. Moreover, one of the military officers who had come
from the Filipinas in the galleon, and up from Acapulco to the City of
Mexico with the conducta, recognized Gil Perez the moment that he laid
eyes on him; and this officer said that he had seen him--only a day or
two before the galleon's sailing--on duty in Manila with the Palace
Guard. And so the fact was settled beyond all doubting that Gil Perez
had been brought by the devil from Manila to the City of Mexico; and,
also, that the devil--since only the devil could have done it--had put
the knowledge of the murderous killing of Don Gomez into his heart.
Wherefore the fact that Gil Perez was in league with the devil was
clear to all the world.

Then the Familiars of the Holy Office for the last time put their
heads together and puzzled and puzzled over the matter; and at the end
of their puzzling they decided that Gil Perez was an innocent person,
and that he undoubtedly had had criminal relations with the devil and
was full of wickedness. Therefore they ordered that, being innocent,
he should be set free from his cell in Santo Domingo; and that, being
a dangerous character whose influence was corrupting, he should be
sent back to Manila in the returning galleon. And that was their
decree.

Gil Perez, Senor, took that disposition of him in the same easy-going
way that he had taken all the other dispositions of him: save that he
grumbled a little--as was to be expected of an old soldier--over
having to leave his comfortably idle life in his snug quarters and to
go again to his fightings and his guard-mounts and his parades. And so
back he went to the Filipinas: only his return journey was made in a
slow and natural manner aboard the galleon--not, as his outward
journey had been made, all in a moment on devils' wings.

To my mind, Senor, it seems that there is more of this story that
ought to be told. For myself, I should like to know why the Familiars
of the Holy Office did not deal a little more severely with a case
that certainly had the devil at both the bottom and the top of it;
and, also, I should like to know what became of Gil Perez when he got
back to Manila in the galleon--and there had to tell over again about
his relations with the devil in order to account for his half year's
absence from duty without leave. But those are matters which I never
have heard mentioned; and what I have told you is all that there is to
tell.




