LEGEND OF THE ADUANA DE SANTO DOMINGO


This gentleman who for love's sake, Senor, conquered his coldness and
his laziness and became all fire and energy, was named Don Juan
Gutierrez Rubin de Celis. He was a caballero of the Order of
Santiago--some say that he wore also the habit of Calatrava--and the
colonel of the regiment of the Tres Villas. He was of a lovable
nature, and ostentatious and arrogant, and in all his ways dilatory
and apathetic to the very last degree. So great were his riches that
not even he himself knew the sum of them: as you will understand when
I tell you that on an occasion of state--it was the entry into the
City in the year 1716 of the new Viceroy, the Marques de
Valero--pearls to the value of thirty thousand pesos were used in the
mere trimming of his casacon.

Being of an age to take part so nobly in that noble ceremony, he must
have been a gentleman well turned of forty, Senor, when the matters
whereof I now am telling you occurred: of which the beginning--and
also the middle and the ending, because everything hinged upon it--was
his falling most furiously in love with a very beautiful young lady;
and his falling in love in that furious fashion was the very first
sign of energy that in all his lifetime, until that moment, he had
shown. The name of this beautiful young lady with whom he fell in love
so furiously was Dona Sara de Garcia Somera y Acuna; and she was less
than half as old as he was, but possessed of a very sensible nature
that made her do more thinking than is done usually by young ladies;
and she was of a noble house, and a blood relative of the Viceroy's:
for which reason the Viceroy--who by that time was Don Juan de Acuna,
Marques de Casafuerte--was much interested in the whole affair.

The love-making of this so notoriously lazy gentleman did not at all
go upon wheels, Senor: because Dona Sara set herself--as was her habit
when dealing with any matter of importance--to thinking about it very
seriously; and the more that she thought about it the more she made
her mind up that so dull and so apathetic a gentleman--who, moreover,
was old enough to be her father--would not in the least be the sort of
husband that she desired. But also, because of her good sense, she
perceived that much was to be said in favor of entering into wedlock
with him: because his rank and his great wealth made him one of the
most important personages in the Vice-Kingdom; and, moreover, for all
that he was old enough to be her father, he still was a very
personable man. And so she thought very hard in both directions, and
could not in either direction make up her mind.

While matters were in this condition, Senor--Don Juan furiously in
love with Dona Sara, and Dona Sara thinking in that sensible way of
hers about being temperately in love with Don Juan--something happened
that gave a new turn to the whole affair. This thing that happened was
that the Viceroy--who was a great friend of Don Juan's; and who, as I
have mentioned, was a kinsman of Dona Sara's, and much interested in
all that was going forward--appointed Don Juan to be Prior of the
Consulado; that is to say, President of the Tribunal of Commerce:
which was a most honorable office, in keeping with his rank and his
riches; and which also was an office--because all the work of it could
be done by deputy, or even left undone--that fitted in with Don Juan's
lazy apathy to a hair.

Now at that time, Senor, the building of the Aduana de Santo Domingo
was in progress--it ceased to be a custom-house many years ago, Senor;
it is occupied by the Secretaria de Comunicaciones now--and it had
been in progress, with no great result from the work that laggingly
was done on it, for a number of years. The charge of the making of
this edifice rested with the Consulado; and, naturally, the new Prior
of the Consulado was even more content than had been his predecessors
in that office to let the making of it lag on.

Then it was, Senor, that there came into the sensible mind of Dona
Sara a notable project for proving whether Don Juan's lazy apathy went
to the very roots of him; or whether, at the very roots of him--over
and above the energy that he had shown in his furious love for
her--he had energy that she could arouse and could set a-going in
practically useful ways. And her reasoning was this wise: that if Don
Juan could be stirred by her urgence to do useful work with vigor,
then was it likely that her urgence would arouse him from all his
apathies--and so would recast him into the sort of husband that she
desired to have. Therefore Dona Sara told Don Juan that she would
marry him only on one condition; and that her condition was that he
should finish completely the long-drawn-out building of the Aduana
within six months from that very day! And Don Juan, Senor, was so
furiously in love with Dona Sara that in the same instant that she
gave him her condition he accepted it; and he--who never had done a
hand's turn of work in all his lifetime--promised her that he would do
the almost impossible piece of work that she had set him to do: and
that the Aduana should be finished completely within six months from
that very day!

And then all the City was amazed--and so, for that matter, Don Juan
himself was--by the fire and the force and the breathless eagerness
with which he set himself to the task that Dona Sara had put upon
him. In a single moment he had gone to every one of all the architects
in the City urging them to take in charge for him that almost
impossible piece of building; and in the very next moment--every one
of all the architects in the City having made answer to him that what
he wanted of them could not even by a miracle be accomplished--he
himself took charge of it: and with a furiousness that matched
precisely--as Dona Sara perceived with hopeful satisfaction--with the
furiousness of his love.

What Don Juan did in that matter, Senor, was done as though in the
insides of him were tempests and volcanoes! From the Tierra Caliente
he brought up as by magic myriads of negro workmen to do the digging
and the heavy carrying; all the quarries around the City he crammed
full of stone-cutters; every mason was set to work at wall-laying;
every carpenter to making the doors and the windows; every brick-yard
to making the tiles for the roof and the floors; every blacksmith to
making the locks and the hinges and the window-gratings and the
balcony rails. And in the midst of his swarms of laborers Don Juan
himself worked harder than all of them put together; and was
everywhere at once among them urging them to hurry and to hurry; and
to any one of them who showed even the slightest sign of lagging there
came from Don Juan's mouth a berating volleying of scorpions and
snakes and toads!

In very truth, Senor, such was Don Juan's raging energy that he was as
a frenzied person. But it was a frenzy that had no real madness in it:
because everything that he did and that he made to be done was
directed by a most sensible discretion--so that not a moment of time
nor the turn of a hand was wasted, and in every single instant the
building grew and grew. And the upshot of it all was that he
accomplished just what he had made his whole soul up he would
accomplish: within the six months that Dona Sara had given him to do
his work in, he did do it--and even with a little time to spare. Three
full days before the last of his six months was ended the Aduana was
finished to the very least part of its smallest detail; and Don
Juan--all aglow over his triumphant fulfilment of Dona Sara's almost
impossible condition--carried the key of that perfectly completed vast
structure to the Palace, and there placed the key of it in the
Viceroy's hands!

Moreover--that all the world might know why it was, and for whom it
was, that his great work had been accomplished--Don Juan caused to be
carved on a wall of the building a most artfully contrived
inscription: that seemed only to give soberly his own name, and the
names of the Consules associated with him, and the date of the
Aduana's completion; but that was so arranged that the first letters
of the five lines of it together made the initials of Dona Sara's
name.

Don Juan thus having done what Dona Sara had set him to do, and what
every one of all the architects in the City had declared could not be
done even by a miracle, it was evident to the whole world that at the
very roots of him was more blazing energy than would suffice for the
equipment of a half hundred of ordinary men. Wherefore Dona Sara was
well satisfied--her urgence having stirred him to do that great useful
work with such masterful vigor--that her urgence equally would arouse
him from all of his apathies: and so would recast him into the sort of
husband that she desired to have. Therefore Dona Sara immediately
gave to Don Juan her hand in marriage: and as the Aduana still is
standing--and precisely where, faster than a miracle, Don Juan built
it--the Senor has only to look at it, and to read the inscription
showing Dona Sara's initials, to know both the truth of this curious
story and that Dona Sara's choice of a husband was well made.




