LEGEND OF LA MUJER HERRADA


I do not know when this matter happened, Senor; but my grandfather,
who told me about it, spoke as though all three of them--the priest,
and the blacksmith, and the woman--had lived a long while before his
time. However, my grandfather said that the priest and the woman, who
was his housekeeper, pretty certainly lived in a house--it is gone
now, Senor--that was in the street that is called the Puerta Falsa de
Santo Domingo. And he said that the blacksmith certainly did live in a
house in the Calle de las Rejas de la Balvanera--because he himself
had seen the house, and had seen the farrier's knife and the pincers
cut on the stone arching above the door. Therefore you perceive,
Senor, that my grandfather was well acquainted with these people, and
that this story is true.

The priest was a secular, Senor, not belonging to any Order; and he
and the blacksmith were compadres together--that is to say, they were
close friends. It was because the blacksmith had a great liking for
his compadre, and a great respect for him, that from time to time he
urged him to send away the housekeeper; but his compadre always had
some pleasant excuse to make about the matter, and so the blacksmith
would be put off. And things went on that way for a number of years.

Now it happened, on a night, that the blacksmith was wakened out of
his sleep by a great pounding at the door of his house; and when he
got up and went to his door he found standing there two blacks--they
were men whom he never had laid eyes on--and with them was a she mule
that they had brought to be shod. The blacks made their excuses to him
politely for waking him at that bad hour: telling him that the mule
belonged to his compadre, and had been sent to him to be shod in the
night and in a hurry because his compadre of a sudden had occasion to
go upon a journey, and that he must start upon his journey very early
on the morning of the following day. Then the blacksmith, looking
closely at the mule, saw that she really was the mule of his
compadre; and so, for friendship's sake, he shod her without more
words. The blacks led the mule away when the shoeing was finished;
and, as they went off into the night with her, they fell to beating
her so cruelly with heavy sticks that the blacksmith talked to them
with great severity. But the blacks kept on beating the mule, and even
after they were lost in the darkness the blacksmith continued to hear
the sound of their blows.

In some ways this whole matter seemed so strange to the blacksmith
that he wanted to know more about it. Therefore he got up very early
in the morning and went to his compadre's house: meaning to ask him
what was the occasion of this journey that had to be taken in such a
hurry, and who those strange blacks were who so cruelly had beaten his
meritorious mule. But when he was come to the house he had to wait a
while before the door was opened; and when at last it did open, there
was his compadre half asleep--and his compadre said that he was not
going on any journey, and that most certainly he had not sent his mule
to be shod. And then, as he got wider awake, he began to laugh at
the blacksmith because of the trick that had been put upon him; and
that the woman might share in the joke of it--they all were great
friends together--he knocked at the door of her room and called to
her. But the woman did not answer back to him; and when he knocked
louder and louder she still gave no sign.

Then he, and the blacksmith too, became anxious about the woman; and
together they opened the door and went into the room. And what they
saw when they were come into the room, Senor, was the most terrible
sight that ever was seen in this world! For there, lying upon her bed,
was that unhappy woman looking all distraught and agonized; and nailed
fast to the feet and to the hands of her were the very same iron shoes
that the blacksmith--who well knew his own forge-work--had nailed fast
to the hoofs of the mule! Moreover, upon her body were the welts and
the bruises left there when the blacks had beaten the mule with their
cruel blows. And the woman, Senor, was as dead as she possibly could
be. So they knew that what had happened was a divine punishment, and
that the blacks were two devils who had changed the woman into a mule
and so had taken her to be shod.

Perceiving, because of such a sign being given him, Senor, that he had
committed an error, the master of that house of horror immediately
went out from it--and at once disappeared completely and never was
heard of again. As for the blacksmith, he was so pained by his share
in the matter that always afterward, until the death of him, he was a
very unhappy man. And that is the story of the Iron-shod Woman, Senor,
from first to last.




