LEGEND OF THE CALLE DE LA CRUZ VERDE


This story is not a sad one, Senor, like the others. It is a joyful
story of a gentleman and a lady who loved each other, and were
married, and lived in happiness together until they died. And it was
because of his happiness that the gentleman caused to be carved on the
corner of his house, below the balcony on which he saw that day the
sign which gave hope to him, this great green cross of stone that is
there still.

The house with the green cross on it, Senor, stands at the corner of
the Calle de la Cruz Verde--the street, you see, was named for it--and
the Calle de Migueles. It was a fine house in the days when Dona
Maria's father built it. Now it is old and shabby, and the saint that
once stood in the niche above the cross is gone. But there is an
excellent pulqueria there, Senor--it is called La Heroina--where
pulque of the best and the freshest is to be had every morning of
every day the whole year round.

I do not know, Senor, when this matter happened; but I have heard it
told that this gentleman, who was named Don Alvaro de Villadiego y
Manrique, came to Mexico in the train of the Viceroy Don Gaston de
Peralta--so it must have happened a very long while ago.

This Don Alvaro was a very handsome gentleman--tall, and slender, and
fair; and he wore clothes of white velvet worked with gold, and a blue
cap with a white feather; and he rode always a very beautiful Arabian
horse. His hair and his little pointed beard were a golden brown,
Senor; and he was a sight to behold!

It happened, on a day, that he was taking the air on his Arabian; and
he was wearing--because a festival of some sort was in progress--all
of his fine clothes. So he came prancing down the Calle de Migueles,
and in the balcony of that corner house--the house on which the green
cross now is--he saw a very beautiful young lady, who was most genteel
in her appearance and as white as snow. He fell in love with her on
that very instant; and she--although because of her virtue and good
training she did not show it--on that very instant fell in love with
him. Then he made inquiry and found that her name was Dona Maria de
Aldarafuente y Segura. Therefore he resolved to marry her. And so,
every day he rode past her balcony and looked up at her with eyes full
of love. As for Dona Maria, she was so well brought up, and her
parents watched her so narrowly, that it was a long while before she
made any answering sign. And for that reason, Senor, she loved him all
the more tenderly in her heart.

Then it happened, at the end of a long while, that Dona Maria's mother
fell ill; and so, the watch upon her being less close, Don Alvaro was
able to get to her hands a letter in which he begged that she would
give to him her love. And he told her in his letter that--if she could
not answer it with another letter--she should give him one of two
signs by which he would know her will. If she did not love him, she
was to hang upon the railing of her balcony a cross of dry
palm-leaves--and when he saw that dry cross he would most certainly,
he told her, that day die. But if she did love him, she was to hang a
cross of green palm-leaves upon the railing of her balcony--and when
he saw that green cross he would know, he told her, that she had given
him her true promise of heaven-perfect happiness for all his life
long.

Being a lady, Senor, Dona Maria let some days go by before she hung on
the railing of her balcony any cross at all--and during those days Don
Alvaro was within no more than a hair's breadth of going mad. And
then--when madness was so close to him that with one single moment
more of waiting his wits would have left him--on a day of days, when
the spring-time sun was shining and all the birds were singing
love-songs together, Don Alvaro saw hanging on the railing of Dona
Maria's balcony a beautiful bright green cross!

Of course, after that, Senor, things went fast and well. By the
respectable intervention of a cleric--who was the friend of Don
Alvaro, and who also was the friend of Dona Maria's parents--all the
difficulties were cleared away in a hurry; and only a fortnight after
the green cross was hung on the railing of Dona Maria's balcony--that
fortnight seemed an endless time to Don Alvaro, but for such a matter
it really was the least that a lady could get ready in--they went
together before the altar, and at the foot of it they vowed to each
other their love. And what is best of all, Senor, is that they kept
faithfully their vow.

Then it was, being gladly married, that Don Alvaro caused the green
cross of stone--so big that it rises to the first floor from the
pavement--to be carved on the corner of the house that thenceforward
they lived in; and it was carved beneath the very balcony where had
hung the green cross of palm-leaves that had given to him Dona Maria's
true promise of heaven-perfect happiness for all his life long.

And there the green cross still is, Senor; and the name of the street,
as I have told you, is the Calle de la Cruz Verde--which of course
proves that this story is true.




