THE THREE COPECKS



  There once was a poor little orphan-lad who had nothing at all
  to live on; so he went to a rich moujik and hired himself out to
  him, agreeing to work for one copeck a year. And when he had
  worked for a whole year, and had received his copeck, he went to
  a well and threw it into the water, saying, "If it don't sink, I'll
  keep it. It will be plain enough I've served my master faithfully."

  But the copeck sank. Well, he remained in service a second
  year, and received a second copeck. Again he flung it into the
  well, and again it sank to the bottom. He remained a third year;
  worked and worked, till the time came for payment. Then his
  master gave him a rouble. "No," says the orphan, "I don't
  want your money; give me my copeck." He got his copeck and
  flung it into the well. Lo and behold! there were all three copecks
  floating on the surface of the water. So he took them and
  went into the town.

  Now as he went along the street, it happened that some small
  boys had got hold of a kitten and were tormenting it. And he
  felt sorry for it, and said:

  "Let me have that kitten, my boys?"

  "Yes, we'll sell it you."

  "What do you want for it?"

  "Three copecks."

  Well the orphan bought the kitten, and afterwards hired
  himself to a merchant, to sit in his shop.

  That merchant's business began to prosper wonderfully. He
  couldn't supply goods fast enough; purchasers carried off everything
  in a twinkling. The merchant got ready to go to sea,
  freighted a ship, and said to the orphan:

  "Give me your cat; maybe it will catch mice on board, and
  amuse me."

  "Pray take it, master! only if you lose it, I shan't let you off
  cheap."

  The merchant arrived in a far off land, and put up at an inn.
  The landlord saw that he had a great deal of money, so he gave
  him a bedroom which was infested by countless swarms of rats
  and mice, saying to himself, "If they should happen to eat him
  up, his money will belong to me." For in that country they knew
  nothing about cats, and the rats and mice had completely got the
  upper hand. Well the merchant took the cat with him to his
  room and went to bed. Next morning the landlord came into
  the room. There was the merchant alive and well, holding the
  cat in his arms, and stroking its fur; the cat was purring away,
  singing its song, and on the floor lay a perfect heap of dead rats
  and mice!

  "Master merchant, sell me that beastie," says the landlord.

  "Certainly."

  "What do you want for it?"

  "A mere trifle. I'll make the beastie stand on his hind legs
  while I hold him up by his forelegs, and you shall pile gold
  pieces around him, so as just to hide him--I shall be content
  with that!"

  The landlord agreed to the bargain. The merchant gave him
  the cat, received a sackful of gold, and as soon as he had settled
  his affairs, started on his way back. As he sailed across the
  seas, he thought:

  "Why should I give the gold to that orphan? Such a lot of
  money in return for a mere cat! that would be too much of a
  good thing. No, much better keep it myself."

  The moment he had made up his mind to the sin, all of a sudden
  there arose a storm--such a tremendous one! the ship was
  on the point of sinking.

  "Ah, accursed one that I am! I've been longing for what
  doesn't belong to me; O Lord, forgive me a sinner! I won't
  keep back a single copeck."

  The moment the merchant began praying the winds were
  stilled, the sea became calm, and the ship went sailing on prosperously
  to the quay.

  "Hail, master!" says the orphan. "But where's my cat?"

  "I've sold it," answers the merchant; "There's your money,
  take it in full."

  The orphan received the sack of gold, took leave of the
  merchant, and went to the strand, where the shipmen were.
  From them he obtained a shipload of incense in exchange for
  his gold, and he strewed the incense along the strand, and burnt
  it in honor of God. The sweet savor spread through all that
  land, and suddenly an old man appeared, and he said to the
  orphan:

  "Which desirest thou--riches, or a good wife?"

  "I know not, old man."

  "Well then, go afield. Three brothers are ploughing over
  there. Ask them to tell thee."

  The orphan went afield. He looked, and saw peasants tilling
  the soil.

  "God lend you aid!" says he.

  "Thanks, good man!" say they. "What dost thou want?"

  "An old man has sent me here, and told me to ask you which
  of the two I shall wish for--riches or a good wife?"

  "Ask our elder brother; he's sitting in that cart there."

  The orphan went to the cart and saw a little boy--one that
  seemed about three years old.

  "Can this be their elder brother?" thought he--however he
  asked him:

  "Which dost thou tell me to choose--riches, or a good wife?"

  "Choose the good wife."

  So the orphan returned to the old man.

  "I'm told to ask for the wife," says he.

  "That's all right!" said the old man, and disappeared from
  sight. The orphan looked round; by his side stood a beautiful
  woman.

  "Hail, good youth!" says she. "I am thy wife; let us go
  and seek a place where we may live."

One of the sins to which the Popular Tale shows itself most hostile is
that of avarice. The folk-tales of all lands delight to gird at misers
and skinflints, to place them in unpleasant positions, and to gloat
over the sufferings which attend their death and embitter their
ghostly existence. As a specimen of the manner in which the humor of
the Russian peasant has manipulated the stories of this class, most of
which probably reached him from the East, we may take the following
tale of the Miser.



