ELIJAH THE PROPHET AND NICHOLAS




  A long while ago there lived a Moujik. Nicholas's day he
  always kept holy, but Elijah's not a bit; he would even work
  upon it. In honor of St. Nicholas he would have a taper lighted
  and a service performed, but about Elijah the Prophet he
  forgot so much as to think.

  Well, it happened one day that Elijah and Nicholas were
  walking over the land belonging to this Moujik; and as they
  walked they looked--in the cornfields the green blades were
  growing up so splendidly that it did one's heart good to look at
  them.

  "Here'll be a good harvest, a right good harvest!" says
  Nicholas, "and the Moujik, too, is a good fellow sure enough,
  both honest and pious: one who remembers God and thinks
  about the Saints! It will fall into good hands--"

  "We'll see by-and-by whether much will fall to his share!"
  answered Elijah; "when I've burnt up all his land with lightning,
  and beaten it all flat with hail, then this Moujik of yours will
  know what's right, and will learn to keep Elijah's day holy."

  Well, they wrangled and wrangled; then they parted asunder.
  St. Nicholas went off straight to the Moujik and said:

  "Sell all your corn at once, just as it stands, to the Priest
  of Elijah. If you don't, nothing will be left of it: it will all be
  beaten flat by hail."

  Off rushed the Moujik to the Priest.

  "Won't your Reverence buy some standing corn? I'll sell
  my whole crop. I'm in such pressing need of money just now.
  It's a case of pay up with me! Buy it, Father! I'll sell it
  cheap."

  They bargained and bargained, and came to an agreement.
  The Moujik got his money and went home.

  Some little time passed by. There gathered together, there
  came rolling up, a stormcloud; with a terrible raining and hailing
  did it empty itself over the Moujik's cornfields, cutting
  down all the crop as if with a knife--not even a single blade did
  it leave standing.

  Next day Elijah and Nicholas walked past. Says Elijah:

  "Only see how I've devastated the Moujik's cornfield!"

  "The Moujik's! No, brother! Devastated it you have
  splendidly, only that field belongs to the Elijah Priest, not to
  the Moujik."

  "To the Priest! How's that?"

  "Why, this way. The Moujik sold it last week to the
  Elijah Priest, and got all the money for it. And so, methinks,
  the Priest may whistle for his money!"

  "Stop a bit!" said Elijah. "I'll set the field all right again.
  It shall be twice as good as it was before."

  They finished talking, and went each his own way. St.
  Nicholas returned to the Moujik, and said:

  "Go to the Priest and buy back your crop--you won't lose
  anything by it."

  The Moujik went to the Priest, made his bow, and said:

  "I see, your Reverence, God has sent you a misfortune--the
  hail has beaten the whole field so flat you might roll a ball
  over it. Since things are so, let's go halves in the loss. I'll
  take my field back, and here's half of your money for you to
  relieve your distress."

  The Priest was rejoiced, and they immediately struck hands
  on the bargain.

  Meanwhile--goodness knows how--the Moujik's ground
  began to get all right. From the old roots shot forth new tender
  stems. Rain-clouds came sailing exactly over the cornfield
  and gave the soil to drink. There sprang up a marvellous crop--tall
  and thick. As to weeds, there positively was not one to be
  seen. And the ears grew fuller and fuller, till they were fairly
  bent right down to the ground.

  Then the dear sun glowed, and the rye grew ripe--like so
  much gold did it stand in the fields. Many a sheaf did the
  Moujik gather, many a heap of sheaves did he set up; and now
  he was beginning to carry the crop, and to gather it together into
  ricks.

  At that very time Elijah and Nicholas came walking by
  again. Joyfully did the Prophet gaze on all the land, and say:

  "Only look, Nicholas! what a blessing! Why, I have rewarded
  the Priest in such wise, that he will never forget it all
  his life."

  "The Priest? No, brother! the blessing indeed is great,
  but this land, you see, belongs to the Moujik. The Priest
  hasn't got anything whatsoever to do with it."

  "What are you talking about?"

  "It's perfectly true. When the hail beat all the cornfield
  flat, the Moujik went to the Priest and bought it back again at
  half price."

  "Stop a bit!" says Elijah. "I'll take the profit out of the
  corn. However many sheaves the Moujik may lay on the
  threshing-floor, he shall never thresh out of them more than a
  peck at a time."

  "A bad piece of work!" thinks St. Nicholas. Off he went
  at once to the Moujik.

  "Mind," says he, "when you begin threshing your corn,
  never put more than one sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor."

  The Moujik began to thresh: from every sheaf he got a peck
  of grain. All his bins, all his storehouses, he crammed with
  rye; but still much remained over. So he built himself new
  barns, and filled them as full as they could hold.

  Well, one day Elijah and Nicholas came walking past his
  homestead, and the Prophet began looking here and there, and
  said:

  "Do you see what barns he's built? has he got anything to
  put into them?"

  "They're quite full already," answers Nicholas.

  "Why, wherever did the Moujik get such a lot of grain?"

  "Bless me! Why, every one of his sheaves gave him a
  peck of grain. When he began to thresh he never put more
  than one sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor."

  "Ah, brother Nicholas!" said Elijah, guessing the truth,
  "it's you who go and tell the Moujik everything!"

  "What an idea! that I should go and tell--"

  "As you please; that's your doing! But that Moujik sha'n't
  forget me in a hurry!"

  "Why, what are you going to do to him?"

  "What I shall do, that I won't tell you," replies Elijah.

  "There's a great danger coming," thinks St. Nicholas, and
  he goes to the Moujik again, and says:

  "Buy two tapers, a big one and a little one, and do thus
  and thus with them."

  Well, next day the Prophet Elijah and St. Nicholas were
  walking along together in the guise of wayfarers, and they met
  the Moujik, who was carrying two wax tapers--one, a big
  rouble one, and the other, a tiny copeck one.

  "Where are you going, Moujik?" asked St. Nicholas.

  "Well, I'm going to offer a rouble taper to Prophet Elijah;
  he's been ever so good to me! When my crops were ruined
  by the hail, he bestirred himself like anything, and gave me
  a plentiful harvest, twice as good as the other would have
  been."

  "And the copeck taper, what's that for?"

  "Why, that's for Nicholas!" said the peasant and passed
  on.

  "There now, Elijah!" says Nicholas, "you say I go and
  tell everything to the Moujik--surely you can see for yourself
  how much truth there is in that!"

  Thereupon the matter ended. Elijah was appeased and
  didn't threaten to hurt the Moujik any more. And the Moujik
  led a prosperous life, and from that time forward he held in
  equal honor Elijah's Day and Nicholas's Day.

It is not always to the Prophet Ilya that the power once attributed to
Perun is now ascribed. The pagan wielder of the thunderbolt is
represented in modern traditions by more than one Christian saint.
Sometimes, as St. George, he transfixes monsters with his lance;
sometimes, as St. Andrew, he smites with his mace a spot given over to
witchcraft. There was a village (says one of the legends of the
Chernigof Government) in which lived more than a thousand witches, and
they used to steal the holy stars, until at last "there was not one
left to light our sinful world." Then God sent the holy Andrew, who
struck with his mace--and all that village was swallowed up by the
earth, and the place thereof became a swamp.

About St. George many stories are told, and still more ballads (if we
may be allowed to call them so) are sung. Under the names of Georgy,
Yury, and Yegory the Brave, he is celebrated as a patron as well of
wolves as of flocks and herds, as a Christian Confessor struggling and
suffering for the faith amid pagan foes, and as a chivalrous destroyer
of snakes and dragons. The discrepancies which exist between the
various representations given of his character and his functions are
very glaring, but they may be explained by the fact that a number of
legendary ideas sprung from separate sources have become associated
with his name; so that in one story his actions are in keeping with
the character of an old Slavonian deity, in another, with that of a
Christian or a Buddhist saint.

In some parts of Russia, when the cattle go out for the first time to
the spring pastures, a pie, made in the form of a sheep, is cut up by
the chief herdsman, and the fragments are preserved as a remedy
against the diseases to which sheep are liable. On St. George's Day in
spring, April 23, the fields are sanctified by a church service, at
the end of which they are sprinkled with holy water. In the Tula
Government a similar service is held over the wells. On the same day,
in some parts of Russia, a youth (who is called by the Slovenes the
Green Yegory) is dressed like our own "Jack in the Green," with
foliage and flowers. Holding a lighted torch in one hand and a pie in
the other, he goes out to the cornfields, followed by girls singing
appropriate songs. A circle of brushwood is then lighted, in the
centre of which is set the pie. All who take part in the ceremony then
sit down around the fire, and eventually the pie is divided among
them.

Numerous legends speak of the strange connection which exists between
St. George and the Wolf. In Little Russia that animal is called "St.
George's Dog," and the carcases of sheep which wolves have killed are
not used for human food, it being held that they have been assigned by
divine command to the beasts of the field. The human victim whom St.
George has doomed to be thus destroyed nothing can save. A man, to
whom such a fate had been allotted, tried to escape from his
assailants by hiding behind a stove; but a wolf transformed itself
into a cat, and at midnight, when all was still, it stole into the
house and seized the appointed prey. A hunter, who had been similarly
doomed, went on killing wolves for some time, and hanging up their
skins; but when the fatal hour arrived, one of the skins became a
wolf, and slew him by whom it had before been slain. In Little Russia
the wolves have their own herdsman--a being like unto a man, who
is often seen in company with St. George. There were two brothers
(says a popular tale), the one rich, the other poor. The poor brother
had climbed up a tree one night, and suddenly he saw beneath him what
seemed to be two men--the one driving a pack of wolves, the other
attending to the conveyance of a quantity of bread. These two beings
were St. George and the Lisun. And St. George distributed the bread
among the wolves, and one loaf which remained over he gave to the poor
brother; who afterwards found that it was of a miraculous nature,
always renewing itself and so supplying its owner with an
inexhaustible store of bread. The rich brother, hearing the story,
climbed up the tree one night in hopes of obtaining a similar present.
But that night St. George found that he had no bread to give to one of
his wolves, so he gave it the rich brother instead.

One of the legends attributes strange forgetfulness on one occasion to
St. George. A certain Gypsy who had a wife and seven children, and
nothing to feed them with, was standing by a roadside lost in
reflection, when Yegory the Brave came riding by. Hearing that the
saint was on his way to heaven, the Gypsy besought him to ask of God
how he was to support his family. St. George promised to do so, but
forgot. Again the Gypsy saw him riding past, and again the saint
promised and forgot. In a third interview the Gypsy asked him to leave
behind his golden stirrup as a pledge.

A third time St. George leaves the presence of the Lord without
remembering the commission with which he has been entrusted. But when
he is about to mount his charger the sight of the solitary stirrup
recalls it to his mind. So he returns and states the Gypsy's request,
and obtains the reply that "the Gypsy's business is to cheat and to
swear falsely." As soon as the Gypsy is told this, he thanks the Saint
and goes off home.

"Where are you going?" cries Yegory. "Give me back my golden stirrup."

"What stirrup?" asks the Gypsy.

"Why, the one you took from me."

"When did I take one from you? I see you now for the first time in my
life, and never a stirrup did I ever take, so help me Heaven!"

So Yegory had to go away without getting his stirrup back.

There is an interesting Bulgarian legend in which St. George appears
in his Christian capacity of dragon-slayer, but surrounded by
personages belonging to heathen mythology. The inhabitants of the
pagan city of Troyan, it states, "did not believe in Christ, but in
gold and silver." Now there were seventy conduits in that city which
supplied it with spring-water; and the Lord made these conduits run
with liquid gold and silver instead of water, so that all the people
had as much as they pleased of the metals they worshipped, but they
had nothing to drink.

After a time the Lord took pity upon them, and there appeared at a
little distance from the city a deep lake. To this they used to go for
water. Only the lake was guarded by a terrible monster, which daily
devoured a maiden, whom the inhabitants of Troyan were obliged to give
to it in return for leave to make use of the lake. This went on for
three years, at the end of which time it fell to the lot of the king's
daughter to be sacrificed by the monster. But when the Troyan
Andromeda was exposed on the shore of the lake, a Perseus arrived to
save her in the form of St. George. While waiting for the monster to
appear, the saint laid his head on her knees, and she dressed his
locks. Then he fell into so deep a slumber that the monster drew nigh
without awaking him. But the Princess began to weep bitterly, and her
scalding tears fell on the face of St. George and awoke him, and he
slew the monster, and afterwards converted all the inhabitants of
Troyan to Christianity.

St. Nicholas generally maintains in the legends the kindly character
attributed to him in the story in which he and the Prophet Ilya are
introduced together. It is to him that at the present day the anxious
peasant turns most readily for help, and it is he whom the legends
represent as being the most prompt of all the heavenly host to assist
the unfortunate among mankind. Thus in one of the stories a peasant is
driving along a heavy road one autumn day, when his cart sticks fast
in the mire. Just then St. Kasian comes by.

"Help me, brother, to get my cart out of the mud!" says the peasant.

"Get along with you!" replies St. Kasian. "Do you suppose I've got
leisure to be dawdling here with you!"

Presently St. Nicholas comes that way. The peasant addresses the same
request to him, and he stops and gives the required assistance.

When the two saints arrive in heaven, the Lord asks them where they
have been.

"I have been on the earth," replies St. Kasian. "And I happened to
pass by a moujik whose cart had stuck in the mud. He cried out to me,
saying, 'Help me to get my cart out!' But I was not going to spoil my
heavenly apparel."

"I have been on the earth," says St. Nicholas, whose clothes were all
covered with mud. "I went along that same road, and I helped the
moujik to get his cart free."

Then the Lord says, "Listen, Kasian! Because thou didst not assist the
moujik, therefore shall men honor thee by thanksgiving once only every
four years. But to thee, Nicholas, because thou didst assist the
moujik to set free his cart, shall men twice every year offer up
thanksgiving."

"Ever since that time," says the story, "it has been customary to
offer prayers and thanksgiving (molebnui) to Nicholas twice a year,
but to Kasian only once every leap-year."

In another story St. Nicholas comes to the aid of an adventurer who
watches beside the coffin of a bewitched princess. There were two
moujiks in a certain village, we are told, one of whom was very rich
and the other very poor. One day the poor man, who was in great
distress, went to the house of the rich man and begged for a loan.

"I will repay it, on my word. Here is Nicholas as a surety," he cried,
pointing to a picture of St. Nicholas.

Thereupon the rich man lent him twenty roubles. The day for repayment
came, but the poor man had not a single copeck. Furious at his loss,
the rich man rushed to the picture of St. Nicholas, crying--

"Why don't you pay up for that pauper? You stood surety for him,
didn't you?"

And as the picture made no reply, he tore it down from the wall, set
it on a cart and drove it away, flogging it as he went, and crying--

"Pay me my money! Pay me my money!"

As he drove past the inn a young merchant saw him, and cried--

"What are you doing, you infidel!"

The moujik explained that as he could not get his money back from a
man who was in his debt, he was proceeding against a surety; whereupon
the merchant paid the debt, and thereby ransomed the picture, which he
hung up in a place of honor, and kept a lamp burning before it. Soon
afterwards an old man offered his services to the merchant, who
appointed him his manager; and from that time all things went well
with the merchant.

But after a while a misfortune befell the land in which he lived, for
"an evil witch enchanted the king's daughter, who lay dead all day
long, but at night got up and ate people." So she was shut up in a
coffin and placed in a church, and her hand, with half the kingdom as
her dowry, was offered to any one who could disenchant her. The
merchant, in accordance with his old manager's instructions, undertook
the task, and after a series of adventures succeeded in accomplishing
it. The last words of one of the narrators of the story are, "Now this
old one was no mere man. He was Nicholas himself, the saint of
God."

With one more legend about this favorite saint, I will conclude this
section of the present chapter. In some of its incidents it closely
resembles the story of "The Smith and the Demon," which was quoted in
the first chapter.



