THE SMITH AND THE DEMON



  Once upon a time there was a Smith, and he had one son, a
  sharp, smart, six-year-old boy. One day the old man went to
  church, and as he stood before a picture of the Last Judgment
  he saw a Demon painted there--such a terrible one!--black, with
  horns and a tail.

  "O my!" says he to himself. "Suppose I get just such
  another painted for the smithy." So he hired an artist, and
  ordered him to paint on the door of the smithy exactly such
  another demon as he had seen in the church. The artist painted
  it. Thenceforward the old man, every time he entered the
  smithy, always looked at the Demon and said, "Good morning,
  fellow-countryman!" And then he would lay the fire in the
  furnace and begin his work.

  Well, the Smith lived in good accord with the Demon for
  some ten years. Then he fell ill and died. His son succeeded
  to his place as head of the household, and took the smithy into
  his own hands. But he was not disposed to show attention to
  the Demon as the old man had done. When he went into the
  smithy in the morning, he never said "Good morrow" to him;
  instead of offering him a kindly word, he took the biggest hammer
  he had handy, and thumped the Demon with it three times
  right on the forehead, and then he would go to his work. And
  when one of God's holy days came round, he would go to church
  and offer each saint a taper; but he would go up to the Demon
  and spit in his face. Thus three years went by, he all the
  while favoring the Evil One every morning either with a spitting
  or with a hammering. The Demon endured it and endured it,
  and at last found it past all endurance. It was too much for
  him.

  "I've had quite enough of this insolence from him!" thinks
  he. "Suppose I make use of a little diplomacy, and play him
  some sort of a trick!"

  So the Demon took the form of a youth, and went to the
  smithy.

  "Good day, uncle!" says he.

  "Good day!"

  "What should you say, uncle, to taking me as an apprentice?
  At all events, I could carry fuel for you, and blow the
  bellows."

  The Smith liked the idea. "Why shouldn't I?" he replied.
  "Two are better than one."

  The Demon began to learn his trade; at the end of a month
  he knew more about smith's work than his master did himself,
  was able to do everything that his master couldn't do. It was
  a real pleasure to look at him! There's no describing how
  satisfied his master was with him, how fond he got of him.
  Sometimes the master didn't go into the smithy at all himself,
  but trusted entirely to his journeyman, who had complete charge
  of everything.

  Well, it happened one day that the master was not at home,
  and the journeyman was left all by himself in the smithy.
  Presently he saw an old lady driving along the street in her
  carriage, whereupon he popped his head out of doors and began
  shouting:--

  "Heigh, sirs! Be so good as to step in here! We've
  opened a new business here; we turn old folks into young
  ones."

  Out of her carriage jumped the lady in a trice, and ran into
  the smithy.

  "What's that you're bragging about? Do you mean to say
  it's true? Can you really do it?" she asked the youth.

  "We haven't got to learn our business!" answered the
  Demon. "If I hadn't been able to do it, I wouldn't have invited
  people to try."

  "And how much does it cost?" asked the lady.

  "Five hundred roubles altogether."

  "Well, then, there's your money; make a young woman of
  me."

  The Demon took the money; then he sent the lady's coachman
  into the village.

  "Go," says he, "and bring me here two buckets full of
  milk."

  After that he took a pair of tongs, caught hold of the lady
  by the feet, flung her into the furnace, and burnt her up; nothing
  was left of her but her bare bones.

  When the buckets of milk were brought, he emptied them
  into a large tub, then he collected all the bones and flung them
  into the milk. Just fancy! at the end of about three minutes
  the lady emerged from the milk--alive, and young, and beautiful!

  Well, she got into her carriage and drove home. There she
  went straight to her husband, and he stared hard at her, but
  didn't know she was his wife.

  "What are you staring at?" says the lady. "I'm young and
  elegant, you see, and I don't want to have an old husband! Be
  off at once to the smithy, and get them to make you young; if
  you don't, I won't so much as acknowledge you!"

  There was no help for it; off set the seigneur. But by that
  time the Smith had returned home, and had gone into the
  smithy. He looked about; the journeyman wasn't to be seen.
  He searched and searched, he enquired and enquired, never a
  thing came of it; not even a trace of the youth could be found.
  He took to his work by himself, and was hammering away,
  when at that moment up drove the seigneur, and walked straight
  into the smithy.

  "Make a young man of me," says he.

  "Are you in your right mind, Barin? How can one make a
  young man of you?"

  "Come, now! you know all about that."

  "I know nothing of the kind."

  "You lie, you scoundrel! Since you made my old woman
  young, make me young too; otherwise, there will be no living
  with her for me."

  "Why I haven't so much as seen your good lady."

  "Your journeyman saw her, and that's just the same thing.
  If he knew how to do the job, surely you, an old hand, must
  have learnt how to do it long ago. Come, now, set to work at
  once. If you don't, it will be the worse for you. I'll have you
  rubbed down with a birch-tree towel."

  The Smith was compelled to try his hand at transforming
  the seigneur. He held a private conversation with the coachman
  as to how his journeyman had set to work with the lady,
  and what he had done to her, and then he thought:--

  "So be it! I'll do the same. If I fall on my feet, good; if
  I don't, well, I must suffer all the same!"

  So he set to work at once, stripped the seigneur naked, laid
  hold of him by the legs with the tongs, popped him into the
  furnace, and began blowing the bellows. After he had burnt
  him to a cinder, he collected his remains, flung them into the
  milk, and then waited to see how soon a youthful seigneur
  would jump out of it. He waited one hour, two hours. But
  nothing came of it. He made a search in the tub. There was
  nothing in it but bones, and those charred ones.

  Just then the lady sent messengers to the smithy, to ask
  whether the seigneur would soon be ready. The poor Smith
  had to reply that the seigneur was no more.

  When the lady heard that the Smith had only turned her
  husband into a cinder, instead of making him young, she was
  tremendously angry, and she called together her trusty servants,
  and ordered them to drag him to the gallows. No sooner said
  than done. Her servants ran to the Smith's house, laid hold of
  him, tied his hands together, and dragged him off to the gallows.
  All of a sudden there came up with them the youngster
  who used to live with the Smith as his journeyman, who asked
  him:--

  "Where are they taking you, master?"

  "They're going to hang me," replied the Smith, and straightway
  related all that had happened to him.

  "Well, uncle!" said the Demon, "swear that you will never
  strike me with your hammer, but that you will pay me the same
  respect your father always paid, and the seigneur shall be alive,
  and young, too, in a trice."

  The Smith began promising and swearing that he would
  never again lift his hammer against the Demon, but would
  always pay him every attention. Thereupon the journeyman
  hastened to the smithy, and shortly afterwards came back again,
  bringing the seigneur with him, and crying to the servants:

  "Hold! hold! Don't hang him! Here's your master!"

  Then they immediately untied the cords, and let the Smith
  go free.

  From that time forward the Smith gave up spitting at the
  Demon and striking him with his hammer. The journeyman
  disappeared, and was never seen again. But the seigneur and
  his lady entered upon a prosperous course of life, and if they
  haven't died, they're living still.


