THE SOLDIER'S MIDNIGHT WATCH




  Once upon a time there was a Soldier who served God and the
  great Gosudar for fifteen years, without ever setting eyes on his
  parents. At the end of that time there came an order from the
  Tsar to grant leave to the soldiers--to twenty-five of each company
  at a time--to go and see their families. Together with
  the rest our Soldier, too, got leave to go, and set off to pay a
  visit to his home in the government of Kief. After a time he
  reached Kief, visited the Lavra, prayed to God, bowed down
  before the holy relics, and then started again for his birthplace,
  a provincial town not far off. Well, he walked and walked.
  Suddenly there happens to meet him a fair maiden who was the
  daughter of a merchant in that same town; a most remarkable
  beauty. Now everyone knows that if a soldier catches sight of
  a pretty girl, nothing will make him pass her by quietly, but he
  hooks on to her somehow or other. And so this Soldier gets
  alongside of the merchant's daughter, and says to her jokingly--

  "How now, fair damsel! not broken in to harness yet?"

  "God knows, soldier, who breaks in whom," replies the girl.
  "I may do it to you, or you to me."

  So saying she laughed and went her way. Well, the Soldier
  arrived at home, greeted his family, and rejoiced greatly at finding
  they were all in good health.

  Now he had an old grandfather, as white as a lun, who had
  lived a hundred years and a bit. The Soldier was gossiping
  with him, and said:

  "As I was coming home, grandfather, I happened to meet
  an uncommonly fine girl, and, sinner that I am, I chaffed her,
  and she said to me:

  "'God knows, soldier, whether you'll break me in to harness,
  or I'll break you.'"

  "Eh, sirs! whatever have you done? Why that's the
  daughter of our merchant here, an awful witch! She's sent
  more than one fine young fellow out of the white world."

  "Well, well! I'm not one of the timid ones, either! You
  won't frighten me in a hurry. We'll wait and see what God will
  send."

  "No, no, grandson!" says the grandfather. "If you don't
  listen to me, you won't be alive to-morrow!"

  "Here's a nice fix!" says the Soldier.

  "Yes, such a fix that you've never known anything half so
  awful, even when soldiering."

  "What must I do then, grandfather?"

  "Why this. Provide yourself with a bridle, and take a thick
  aspen cudgel, and sit quietly in the izba--don't stir a step anywhere.
  During the night she will come running in, and if she
  manages to say before you can 'Stand still, my steed!' you
  will straightway turn into a horse. Then she will jump upon
  your back, and will make you gallop about until she has ridden
  you to death. But if you manage to say before she speaks,
  'Tprru! stand still, jade!' she will be turned into a mare.
  Then you must bridle her and jump on her back. She will run
  away with you over hill and dale, but do you hold your own; hit
  her over the head with the aspen cudgel, and go on hitting her
  until you beat her to death."

  The Soldier hadn't expected such a job as this, but there
  was no help for it. So he followed his grandfather's advice,
  provided himself with a bridle and an aspen cudgel, took his
  seat in a corner, and waited to see what would happen. At the
  midnight hour the passage door creaked and the sound of steps
  was heard; the witch was coming! The moment the door of
  the room opened, the Soldier immediately cried out--

  "Tprru! stand still, jade!"

  The witch turned into a mare, and he bridled her, led her
  into the yard, and jumped on her back. The mare carried him
  off over hills and dales and ravines, and did all she could to try
  and throw her rider. But no! the Soldier stuck on tight, and
  thumped her over the head like anything with the aspen cudgel,
  and went on treating her with a taste of the cudgel until he
  knocked her off her feet, and then pitched into her as she lay on
  the ground, gave her another half-dozen blows or so, and at last
  beat her to death.

  By daybreak he got home.

  "Well, my friend! how have you got on?" asks his grandfather.

  "Glory be to God, grandfather! I've beaten her to death!"

  "All right! now lie down and go to sleep."

  The Soldier lay down and fell into a deep slumber. Towards
  evening the old man awoke him--

  "Get up, grandson."

  He got up.

  "What's to be done now? As the merchant's daughter is
  dead, you see, her father will come after you, and will bid you
  to his house to read psalms over the dead body."

  "Well, grandfather, am I to go, or not?"

  "If you go, there'll be an end of you; and if you don't go,
  there'll be an end of you! Still, it's best to go."

  "But if anything happens, how shall I get out of it?"

  "Listen, grandson! When you go to the merchant's he will
  offer you brandy; don't you drink much--drink only a moderate
  allowance. Afterwards the merchant will take you into the room
  in which his daughter is lying in her coffin, and will lock you in
  there. You will read out from the psalter all the evening, and
  up to midnight. Exactly at midnight a strong wind will suddenly
  begin to blow, the coffin will begin to shake, its lid will
  fall off. Well, as soon as these horrors begin, jump on to the
  stove as quick as you can, squeeze yourself into a corner, and
  silently offer up prayers. She won't find you there."

  Half an hour later came the merchant, and besought the
  Soldier, crying:

  "Ah, Soldier! there's a daughter of mine dead; come and
  read the psalter over her."

  The Soldier took a psalter and went off to the merchant's
  house. The merchant was greatly pleased, seated him at his
  table, and began offering him brandy to drink. The Soldier
  drank, but only moderately, and declined to drink any more.
  The merchant took him by the hand and led him to the room in
  which the corpse lay.

  "Now then," he says, "read away at your psalter."

  Then he went out and locked the door. There was no help
  for it, so the Soldier took to his psalter and read and read.
  Exactly at midnight there was a great blast of wind, the coffin
  began to rock, its lid flew off. The Soldier jumped quickly on
  to the stove, hid himself in a corner, guarded himself by a sign
  of the cross, and began whispering prayers. Meanwhile the
  witch had leapt out of the coffin, and was rushing about from
  side to side--now here, now there. Then there came running
  up to her countless swarms of evil spirits; the room was full of
  them!

  "What are you looking for?" say they.

  "A soldier. He was reading here a moment ago, and now
  he's vanished!"

  The devils eagerly set to work to hunt him up. They
  searched and searched, they rummaged in all the corners. At
  last they cast their eyes on the stove; at that moment, luckily
  for the Soldier, the cocks began to crow. In the twinkling of
  an eye all the devils had vanished, and the witch lay all of a
  heap on the floor. The Soldier got down from the stove, laid
  her body in the coffin, covered it up all right with the lid, and
  betook himself again to his psalter. At daybreak came the
  master of the house, opened the door, and said--

  "Hail, Soldier!"

  "I wish you good health, master merchant."

  "Have you spent the night comfortably?"

  "Glory be to God! yes."

  "There are fifty roubles for you, but come again, friend, and
  read another night."

  "Very good, I'll come."

  The Soldier returned home, lay down on the bench, and
  slept till evening. Then he awoke and said--

  "Grandfather, the merchant bid me go and read the psalter
  another night. Should I go or not?"

  "If you go, you won't remain alive, and if you don't go, just
  the same! But you'd better go. Don't drink much brandy,
  drink just what is right; and when the wind blows, and the
  coffin begins to rock, slip straight into the stove. There no one
  will find you."

  The Soldier got ready and went to the merchant's, who
  seated him at table, and began plying him with brandy. Afterwards
  he took him to where the corpse was, and locked him into
  the room.

  The Soldier went on reading, reading. Midnight came, the
  wind blew, the coffin began to rock, the coffin lid fell afar off on
  the ground. He was into the stove in a moment. Out jumped
  the witch and began rushing about; round her swarmed devils,
  the room was full of them!

  "What are you looking for?" they cry.

  "Why, there he was reading a moment ago, and now he's
  vanished out of sight. I can't find him."

  The devils flung themselves on the stove.

  "Here's the place," they cried, "where he was last night!"

  There was the place, but he wasn't there! This way and
  that they rushed. Suddenly the cocks began to crow, the devils
  vanished, the witch lay stretched on the floor.

  The Soldier stayed awhile to recover his breath, crept out
  of the stove, put the merchant's daughter back in her coffin, and
  took to reading the psalter again. Presently he looks round,
  the day has already dawned. His host arrives:

  "Hail, Soldier!" says he.

  "I wish you good health, master merchant."

  "Has the night passed comfortably?"

  "Glory be to God! yes."

  "Come along here, then."

  The merchant led him out of the room, gave him a hundred
  roubles, and said--

  "Come, please, and read here a third night; I sha'n't treat
  you badly."

  "Good, I'll come."

  The Soldier returned home.

  "Well, grandson, what has God sent you?" says his grandfather.

  "Nothing much, grandfather! The merchant told me to
  come again. Should I go or not?"

  "If you go, you won't remain alive, and if you don't go, you
  won't remain alive! But you'd better go."

  "But if anything happens where must I hide?"

  "I'll tell you, grandson. Buy yourself a frying-pan, and hide
  it so that the merchant sha'n't see it. When you go to his house
  he'll try to force a lot of brandy on you. You look out, don't
  drink much, drink just what you can stand. At midnight, as
  soon as the wind begins to roar, and the coffin to rock, do you
  that very moment climb on to the stove-pipe, and cover yourself
  over with the frying-pan. There no one will find you out."

  The Soldier had a good sleep, bought himself a frying-pan,
  hid it under his cloak, and towards evening went to the merchant's
  house. The merchant seated him at table and took to plying
  him with liquor--tried every possible kind of invitation and
  cajolery on him.

  "No," says the Soldier, "that will do. I've had my whack.
  I won't have any more."

  "Well, then, if you won't drink, come along and read your
  psalter."

  The merchant took him to his dead daughter, left him alone
  with her, and locked the door.

  The Soldier read and read. Midnight came, the wind blew,
  the coffin began to rock, the cover flew afar off. The Soldier
  jumped up on the stove-pipe, covered himself with the frying-pan,
  protected himself with a sign of the cross, and awaited what was
  going to happen. Out jumped the witch and began rushing
  about. Round her came swarming countless devils, the izba
  was full of them! They rushed about in search of the Soldier;
  they looked into the stove--

  "Here's the place," they cried, "where he was last night."

  "There's the place, but he's not there."

  This way and that they rush,--cannot see him anywhere.
  Presently there stepped across the threshold a very old devil.

  "What are you looking for?"

  "The Soldier. He was reading here a moment ago, and now
  he's disappeared."

  "Ah! no eyes! And who's that sitting on the stove-pipe
  there?"

  The Soldier's heart thumped like anything; he all but tumbled
  down on the ground!

  "There he is, sure enough!" cried the devils, "but how are
  we to settle him. Surely it's impossible to reach him there?"

  "Impossible, forsooth! Run and lay your hands on a candle-end
  which has been lighted without a blessing having been
  uttered over it."

  In an instant the devils brought the candle-end, piled up a
  lot of wood right under the stove-pipe, and set it alight. The
  flame leapt high into the air, the Soldier began to roast: first one
  foot, then the other, he drew up under him.

  "Now," thinks he, "my death has come!"

  All of a sudden, luckily for him, the cocks began to crow,
  the devils vanished, the witch fell flat on the floor. The soldier
  jumped down from the stove-pipe, and began putting out the
  fire. When he had put it out he set every thing to rights, placed
  the merchant's daughter in her coffin, covered it up with the
  lid, and betook himself to reading the psalter. At daybreak
  came the merchant, and listened at the door to find out whether
  the Soldier was alive or not. When he heard his voice he
  opened the door and said--

  "Hail, Soldier!"

  "I wish you good health, master merchant."

  "Have you passed the night comfortably?"

  "Glory be to God, I've seen nothing bad."

  The merchant gave him a hundred and fifty roubles, and
  said--

  "You've done a deal of work, Soldier! do a little more.
  Come here to-night and carry my daughter to the graveyard."

  "Good, I'll come."

  "Well, friend, what has God given?"

  "Glory be to God, grandfather, I've got off safe! The merchant
  has asked me to be at his house to-night, to carry his
  daughter to the graveyard. Should I go or not?"

  "If you go, you won't be alive, and if you don't go, you won't
  be alive. But you must go; it will be better so."

  "But what must I do? tell me."

  "Well this. When you get to the merchant's, everything will
  be ready there. At ten o'clock the relations of the deceased will
  begin taking leave of her; and afterwards they will fasten three
  iron hoops round the coffin, and place it on the funeral car; and
  at eleven o'clock they will tell you to take it to the graveyard.
  Do you drive off with the coffin, but keep a sharp look-out. One
  of the hoops will snap. Never fear, keep your seat bravely; a
  second will snap, keep your seat all the same; but when the
  third hoop snaps, instantly jump on to the horse's back and
  through the duga (the wooden arch above its neck), and run
  away backwards. Do that, and no harm will come to you."

  The Soldier lay down to sleep, slept till the evening, and then
  went to the merchant's. At ten o'clock the relations began
  taking leave of the deceased; then they set to work to fasten
  iron hoops round the coffin. They fastened the hoops, set the
  coffin on the funeral car, and cried--

  "Now then, Soldier! drive off, and God speed you!"

  The Soldier got into the car and set off: at first he drove
  slowly, but as soon as he was out of sight he let the horse go
  full split. Away he galloped, but all the while he kept an eye on
  the coffin. Snap went one hoop--and then another. The witch
  began gnashing her teeth.

  "Stop!" she cried, "you sha'n't escape! I shall eat you up
  in another moment."

  "No, dovey! Soldiers are crown property; no one is allowed
  to eat them."

  Here the last hoop snapped: on to the horse jumped the
  Soldier, and through the duga, and then set off running backwards.
  The witch leapt out of the coffin and tore away in pursuit.
  Lighting on the Soldier's footsteps she followed them back
  to the horse, ran right round it, saw the soldier wasn't there, and
  set off again in pursuit of him. She ran and ran, lighted again
  on his footsteps, and again came back to the horse. Utterly at
  her wit's end, she did the same thing some ten times over. Suddenly
  the cocks began crowing. There lay the witch stretched
  out flat on the road! The Soldier picked her up, put her in the
  coffin, slammed the lid down, and drove her to the graveyard.
  When he got there he lowered the coffin into the grave, shovelled
  the earth on top of it, and returned to the merchant's house.

  "I've done it all," says he; "catch hold of your horse."

  When the merchant saw the Soldier he stared at him with
  wide-open eyes.

  "Well, Soldier!" said he, "I know a good deal! and as to
  my daughter, we needn't speak of her. She was awfully sharp,
  she was! But, really, you know more than we do!"

  "Come now, master merchant! pay me for my work."

  So the merchant handed him over two hundred roubles. The
  soldier took them, thanked him, and then went home, and gave
  his family a feast.

In one of the skazkas a malignant witch is destroyed by a benignant
female power. It had been predicted that a certain baby princess would
begin flying about the world as soon as she was fifteen. So her
parents shut her up in a building in which she never saw the light of
day, nor the face of a man. For it was illuminated by artificial
means, and none but women had access to it. But one day, when her
nurses and Mamzeli had gone to a feast at the palace, she found a
door unlocked, and made her way into the sunlight. After this her
attendants were obliged to allow her to go where she wished, when her
parents were away. As she went roaming about the palace she came to a
cage "in which a Zhar-Ptitsa, lay [as if] dead." This bird, her
guardians told her, slept soundly all day, but at night her papa flew
about on it. Farther on she came to a veiled portrait. When the veil
was lifted, she cried in astonishment "Can such beauty be?" and
determined to fly on the Zhar-Ptitsa to the original of the picture.
So at night she sought the Zhar-Ptitsa, which was sitting up and
flapping its wings, and asked whether she might fly abroad on its
back. The bird consented and bore her far away. Three times it carried
her to the room of the prince whose portrait she had so much admired.
On the first and second occasion he remained asleep during her visit,
having been plunged into a magic slumber by the Zhar-Ptitsa. But
during her third visit he awoke, "and he and she wept and wept, and
exchanged betrothal rings." So long did they remain talking that,
before the Zhar-Ptitsa and his rider could get back, "the day began
to dawn--the bird sank lower and lower and fell to the ground." Then
the princess, thinking it was really dead, buried it in the
earth--having first cut off its wings, and "attached them to herself
so as to walk more lightly."

After various adventures she comes to a land of mourning. "Why are
you so mournful?" she asks. "Because our king's son has gone out of
his mind," is the reply. "He eats a man every night." Thereupon she
goes to the king and obtains leave to watch the prince by night. As
the clock strikes twelve the prince, who is laden with chains, makes a
rush at her; but the wings of the Zhar-Ptitsa rustle around her, and
he sits down again. This takes place three times, after which the
light goes out. She leaves the room in search of the means of
rekindling it, sees a glimmer in the distance, and sets off with a
lantern in search of it. Presently she finds an old witch who is
sitting before a fire, above which seethes a cauldron. "What have you
got there?" she asks. "When this cauldron seethes," replies the witch,
"within it does the heart of Prince Ivan rage madly."

Pretending to be merely getting a light, the Princess contrives to
splash the seething liquid over the witch, who immediately falls dead.
Then she looks into the cauldron, and there, in truth, she sees the
Prince's heart. When she returns to his room he has recovered his
senses. "Thank you for bringing a light," he says. "Why am I in
chains?" "Thus and thus," says she. "You went out of your mind and ate
people." Whereat he wonders greatly.

The Zhar-Ptitsa, or Fire-Bird, which plays so important a part in
this story, is worthy of special notice. Its name is sufficient to
show its close connection with flame or light, and its appearance
corresponds with its designation. Its feathers blaze with silvery or
golden sheen, its eyes shine like crystal, it dwells in a golden cage.
In the depth of the night it flies into a garden, and lights it up as
brightly as could a thousand burning fires. A single feather from its
tail illuminates a dark room. It feeds upon golden apples which have
the power of bestowing youth and beauty, or according to a Croatian
version, on magic-grasses. Its song, according to Bohemian legends,
heals the sick and restores sight to the blind. We have already seen
that, as the Phoenix, of which it seems to be a Slavonic counterpart,
dies in the flame from which it springs again into life, so the
Zhar-Ptitsa sinks into a death-like slumber when the day dawns, to
awake to fresh life after the sunset.

One of the skazkas about the Zhar-Ptitsa closely resembles the
well-known German tale of the Golden Bird. But it is a
"Chap-book" story, and therefore of doubtful origin. King Vuislaf has
an apple-tree which bears golden fruits. These are stolen by a
Zhar-Ptitsa which flies every night into the garden, so he orders
his sons to keep watch there by turns. The elder brothers cannot keep
awake, and see nothing; but the youngest of the three, Prince Ivan,
though he fails to capture the bird, secures one of its tail-feathers.
After a time he leaves his home and goes forth in search of the bird.
Aided by a wolf, he reaches the garden in which the Zhar-Ptitsa
lives, and succeeds in taking it out of its golden cage. But trying,
in spite of the wolf's warning, to carry off the cage itself, an alarm
is sounded, and he is taken prisoner. After various other adventures
he is killed by his envious brothers, but of course all comes right in
the end. In a version of the story which comes from the Bukovina, one
of the incidents is detailed at greater length than in either the
German or the Russian tale. When the hero has been killed by his
brothers, and they have carried off the Zhar-Ptitsa, and their
victim's golden steed, and his betrothed princess--as long as he lies
dead, the princess remains mute and mournful, the horse refuses to
eat, the bird is silent, and its cage is lustreless. But as soon as he
comes back to life, the princess regains her spirits, and the horse
its appetite. The Zhar-Ptitsa recommences its magic song, and its
cage flashes anew like fire.

In another skazka a sportsman finds in a forest "a golden feather
of the Zhar-Ptitsa; like fire does the feather shine!" Against the
advice of his "heroic steed," he picks up the feather and takes it to
the king, who sends him in search of the bird itself. Then he has
wheat scattered on the ground, and at dawn he hides behind a tree near
it. "Presently the forest begins to roar, the sea rises in waves, and
the Zhar-Ptitsa flies up, lights upon the ground and begins to peck
the wheat." Then the "heroic steed" gallops up, sets its hoof upon the
bird's wing, and presses it to the ground, so that the shooter is able
to bind it with cords, and take it to the king. In a variant of the
story the bird is captured by means of a trap--a cage in which "pearls
large and small" have been strewed.

                                   

I had intended to say something about the various golden haired or
golden-horned animals which figure in the Skazkas, but it will be
sufficient for the present to refer to the notices of them which occur
in Prof. de Gubernatis's "Zoological Mythology." And now I will bring
this chapter to a close with the following weird story of the Warlock.




