MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT




Most of the magical "properties" of the "skazka-drama," closely
resemble those which have already been rendered familiar to us by
well-known folk-tales. Of such as these--of "caps of darkness," of
"seven-leagued boots," of "magic cudgels," of "Fortunatus's purses,"
and the like--it is unnecessary, for the present, to say more
than that they are of as common occurrence in Slavonic as in other
stories. But there are some among them which materially differ from
their counterparts in more western lands, and are therefore worthy of
special notice. To the latter class belong the Dolls of which mention
has already been made, and the Waters of Life and Death of which I am
now about to speak.

A Water of Life plays an important part in the folk-tales of every
land. When the hero of a "fairy story" has been done to death by
evil hands, his resuscitation by means of a healing and vivifying
lotion or ointment follows almost as a matter of course. And by
common consent the Raven (or some sort of crow) is supposed to know
where this invaluable specific is to be found, a knowledge which
it shares with various supernatural beings as well as with some human
adepts in magic, and sometimes with the Snake. In all these matters
the Russian and the Western tales agree, but the Skazka differs from
most stories of its kind in this respect, that it almost invariably
speaks of two kinds of magic waters as being employed for the
restoration of life. We have already seen in the story of "Marya
Morevna," that one of these, sometimes called the mertvaya voda--the
"dead water," or "Water of Death"--when sprinkled over a mutilated
corpse, heals all its wounds; while the other, which bears the name of
the zhivaya voda,--the "living water," or "Water of Life"--endows it
once more with vitality.

As a general rule, the two waters of which mention is made in the
Skazkas possess the virtues, and are employed in the manner, mentioned
above; but there are cases in which their powers are of a different
nature. Sometimes we meet with two magic fluids, one of which heals
all wounds, and restores sight to the blind and vigor to the cripple,
while the other destroys all that it touches. Sometimes, also,
recourse is had to magic draughts of two kinds, the one of which
strengthens him who quaffs it, while the other produces the opposite
effect. Such liquors as these are known as the "Waters of Strength and
Weakness," and are usually described as being stowed away in the
cellar of some many-headed Snake. For the Snake is often mentioned as
the possessor, or at least the guardian, of magic fluids. Thus one of
the Skazkas speaks of a wondrous garden, in which are two springs
of healing and vivifying water, and around that garden is coiled like
a ring a mighty serpent. Another tells how a flying Snake brought two
heroes to a lake, into which they flung a green bough, and immediately
the bough broke into flame and was consumed. Then it took them to
another lake, into which they cast a mouldy log. And the log
straightway began to put forth buds and blossoms.

In some cases the magic waters are the property, not of a Snake, but
of one of the mighty heroines who so often occur in these stories, and
who bear so great a resemblance to Brynhild, as well in other respects
as in that of her enchanted sleep. Thus in one of the Skazkas an
aged king dreams that "beyond thrice nine lands, in the thirtieth
country, there is a fair maiden from whose hands and feet water is
flowing, of which water he who drinks will become thirty years
younger." His sons go forth in search of this youth-giving liquid, and,
after many adventures, the youngest is directed to the golden castle in
which lives the "fair maiden," whom his father has seen in his vision.
He has been told that when she is awake her custom is to divert herself
in the green fields with her Amazon host--"for nine days she rambles
about, and then for nine days she sleeps a heroic slumber." The Prince
hides himself among the bushes near the castle, and sees a fair maiden
come out of it surrounded by an armed band, "and all the band consists
of maidens, each one more beautiful than the other. And the most
beautiful, the most never-enough-to-be-gazed-upon, is the Queen
herself." For nine days he watches the fair band of Amazons as they
ramble about. On the tenth day all is still, and he enters the castle.
In the midst of her slumbering guards sleeps the Queen on a couch of
down, the healing water flowing from her hands and feet. With it he
fills two flasks, and then he retires. When the Queen awakes, she
becomes conscious of the theft and pursues the Prince. Coming up with
him, she slays him with a single blow, but then takes compassion on
him, and restores him to life.

In another version of the story, the precious fluid is contained in a
flask which is hidden under the pillow of the slumbering "Tsar
Maiden." The Prince steals it and flees, but he bears on him the
weight of sin, and so, when he tries to clear the fence which girds
the enchanted castle, his horse strikes one of the cords attached to
it, and the spell is broken which maintains the magic sleep in which
the realm is locked. The Tsar Maiden pursues the thief, but does not
succeed in catching him. He is killed, however, by his elder brothers,
who "cut him into small pieces," and then take the flask of magic
water to their father. The murdered prince is resuscitated by the
mythical bird known by the name of the Zhar-Ptitsa, which collects
his scattered fragments, puts them together, and sprinkles them first
with "dead water" and then with "live-water,"--conveyed for that
purpose in its beak--after which the prince gets up, thanks his
reviver, and goes his way.

In one of the numerous variants of the story in which a prince is
exposed to various dangers by his sister--who is induced to plot
against his life by her demon lover, the Snake--the hero is sent in
search of "a healing and a vivifying water," preserved between two
lofty mountains which cleave closely together, except during "two or
three minutes" of each day. He follows his instructions, rides to a
certain spot, and there awaits the hour at which the mountains fly
apart. "Suddenly a terrible hurricane arose, a mighty thunder smote,
and the two mountains were torn asunder. Prince Ivan spurred his
heroic steed, flew like a dart between the mountains, dipped two
flasks in the waters, and instantly turned back." He himself escapes
safe and sound, but the hind legs of his horse are caught between the
closing cliffs, and smashed to pieces. The magic waters, of course,
soon remedy this temporary inconvenience.

In a Slovak version of this story, a murderous mother sends her son
to two mountains, each of which is cleft open once in every
twenty-four hours--the one opening at midday and the other at
midnight; the former disclosing the Water of Life, the latter the
Water of Death. In a similar story from the Ukraine, mention is
made of two springs of healing and life-giving water, which are
guarded by iron-beaked ravens, and the way to which lies between
grinding hills. The Fox and the Hare are sent in quest of the magic
fluid. The Fox goes and returns in safety, but the Hare, on her way
back, is not in time quite to clear the meeting cliffs, and her tail
is jammed in between them. Since that time, hares have had no
tails.

On the Waters of Strength and Weakness much stress is laid in many of
the tales about the many-headed Snakes which carry off men's wives and
daughters to their metallic castles. In one of these, for instance,
the golden-haired Queen Anastasia has been torn away by a whirlwind
from her husband "Tsar Byel Byelyanin" [the White King]. As in the
variant of the story already quoted, her sons go in search of
her, and the youngest of them, after finding three palaces--the first
of copper, the second of silver, the third of gold, each containing a
princess held captive by Vikhor, the whirlwind--comes to a fourth
palace gleaming with diamonds and other precious stones. In it he
discovers his long-lost mother, who gladly greets him, and at once
takes him into Vikhor's cellar. Here is the account of what ensued.

  Well, they entered the cellar; there stood two tubs of water,
  the one on the right hand, the other on the left. Says the
  Queen--

  "Take a draught of the water that stands on the right
  hand." Prince Ivan drank of it.

  "Now then, how strong do you feel?" said she.

  "So strong that I could upset the whole palace with one
  hand," he replied.

  "Come now, drink again."

  The Prince drank once more.

  "How strong do you feel now?" she asked.

  "Why now, if I wanted, I could give the whole world a
  jolt."

  "Oh that's plenty then! Now make these tubs change
  places--that which stands on the right, set on the left: and
  that which is on the left, change to the right."

  Prince Ivan took the tubs and made them change places.
  Says the Queen--

  "See now, my dear son; in one of these tubs is the 'Water
  of Strength,' in the other is the 'Water of Weakness.' He
  who drinks of the former becomes a mighty hero, but he who
  drinks of the second loses all his vigor. Vikhor always quaffs
  the Strong Water, and places it on the right-hand side; therefore
  you must deceive him, or you will never be able to hold
  out against him."

The Queen proceeds to tell her son that, when Vikhor comes home, he
must hide beneath her purple cloak, and watch for an opportunity of
seizing her gaoler's magic mace. Vikhor will fly about till he is
tired, and will then have recourse to what he supposes is the "Strong
Water;" this will render him so feeble that the Prince will be able to
kill him. Having received these instructions, and having been warned
not to strike Vikhor after he is dead, the Prince conceals himself.
Suddenly the day becomes darkened, the palace quivers, and Vikhor
arrives; stamping on the ground, he becomes a noble gallant, who
enters the palace, "holding in his hands a battle mace." This Prince
Ivan seizes, and a long struggle takes place between him and Vikhor,
who flies away with him over seas and into the clouds. At last, Vikhor
becomes exhausted and seeks the place where he expects to find the
invigorating draught on which he is accustomed to rely. The result is
as follows:

  Dropping right into his cellar, Vikhor ran to the tub which
  stood on the right, and began drinking the Water of Weakness.
  But Prince Ivan rushed to the left, quaffed a deep draught of
  the Water of Strength, and became the mightiest hero in the
  whole world. Then seeing that Vikhor was perfectly enfeebled,
  he snatched from him his keen faulchion, and with a single
  blow struck off his head. Behind him voices began to cry:

  "Strike again! strike again! or he will come to life!"

  "No," replied the Prince, "a hero's hand does not strike
  twice, but finishes its work with a single blow." And straightway
  he lighted a fire, burnt the head and the trunk, and scattered
  the ashes to the winds.

The part played by the Water of Strength in this story may be
compared with "the important share which the exhilarating juice of the
Soma-plant assumes in bracing Indra for his conflict with the hostile
powers in the atmosphere," and Vikhor's sudden debility with that of
Indra when the Asura Namuchi "drank up Indra's strength along with a
draught of wine and soma."

Sometimes, as has already been remarked, one of the two magic waters
is even more injurious than the Water of Weakness. The following
may be taken as a specimen of the stories in which there is introduced
a true Water of Death--one of those deadly springs which bear the same
relation to the healing and vivifying founts that the enfeebling bears
to the strengthening water. The Baba Yaga who figures in it is, as is
so often the case, replaced by a Snake in the variant to which
allusion has already been made.



