He receives the List of Immortals








From the Unicorn Precipice he went on to the Jade Palace of
Abstraction. Here he was presented to Yuean-shih. From him he received
the List of Promotions to Immortals, which Nan-chi Hsien-weng,
'Ancient Immortal of the South Pole,' had brought, and was told to
go and erect a Feng Shen T'ai (Spirits' Promotion Terrace) on which
to exhibit it. Yuean-shih also warned him that if anyone called him
while he was on the way he was to be most careful not to answer. On
reaching the Unicorn Precipice on his way back, he heard some one
call: "Chiang Tzu-ya!" This happened three times without his paying
any heed. Then the voice was heard to say: "Now that you are Prime
Minister, how devoid of feeling and forgetful of bygone benefits you
must be not to remember one who studied with you in the Jade Palace
of Abstraction!" Tzu-ya could not but turn his head and look. He
then saw that it was Shen Kung-pao. He said: "Brother, I did not know
it was you who were calling me, and I did not heed you as Shih-tsun
told me on no account to reply." Shen Kung-pao said: "What is that
you hold in your hand?" He told him it was the List of Promotions
to Immortals. Shen Kung-pao then tried to entice Tzu-ya from his
allegiance to Chou. Among Shen's tactics was that of convincing
Tzu-ya of the superiority of the magical arts at the disposal of
the supporters of Chou Wang. "You," he said, "can drain the sea,
change the hills, and suchlike things, but what are those compared
with my powers, who can take off my head, make it mount into space,
travel 10,000,000 _li_, and return to my neck just as complete as
before and able to speak? Burn your List of Promotions to Immortals
and come with me." Tzu-ya, thinking that a head which could travel
10,000,000 _li_ and be the same as before was exceedingly rare, said:
"Brother, you take your head off, and if in reality it can do as you
say, rise into space and return and be as before, I shall be willing to
burn the List of Promotions to Immortals and return with you to Chao
Ko." Shen Kung-pao said: "You will not go back on your word?" Tzu-ya
said: "When your elder brother has spoken his word is as unchangeable
as Mount T'ai, How can there be any going back on my word?"









