Builds a Palace for Chin Mu








About this time T'ai-wu Fu-jen, the third daughter of Hsi Wang Mu,
had entered a nunnery on Nan-min Shan, to the north of Lo-fou Shan,
where her mother's palace was situated. She mounted a dragon to
visit her mother, and all along the course left a streak of light in
her wake. One day the Emperor Yao, from the top of Ch'ing-yuen Shan,
saw this track of light, and asked Shen I the cause of this unusual
phenomenon. The latter mounted the current of luminous air, and
letting it carry him whither it listed, found himself on Lo-fou Shan,
in front of the door of the mountain, which was guarded by a great
spiritual monster. On seeing Shen I this creature called together
a large number of phoenixes and other birds of gigantic size and
set them at Shen I. One arrow, however, settled the matter. They
all fled, the door opened, and a lady followed by ten attendants
presented herself. She was no other than Chin Mu herself. Shen I,
having saluted her and explained the object of his visit, was admitted
to the goddess's palace, and royally entertained.

"I have heard," said Shen I to her, "that you possess the pills of
immortality; I beg you to give me one or two." "You are a well-known
architect," replied Chin Mu; "please build me a palace near this
mountain." Together they went to inspect a celebrated site known as
Pai-yue-kuei Shan, 'White Jade-tortoise Mountain,' and fixed upon it
as the location of the new abode of the goddess. Shen I had all the
spirits of the mountain to work for him. The walls were built of jade,
sweet-smelling woods were used for the framework and wainscoting,
the roof was of glass, the steps of agate. In a fortnight's time
sixteen palace buildings stretched magnificently along the side of
the mountain. Chin Mu gave to the architect a wonderful pill which
would bestow upon him immortality as well as the faculty of being
able at will to fly through the air. "But," she said, "it must not
be eaten now: you must first go through a twelve months' preparatory
course of exercise and diet, without which the pill will not have all
the desired results." Shen I thanked the goddess, took leave of her,
and, returning to the Emperor, related to him all that had happened.









