Miao Shan's Renunciation








There now remained only Miao Shan. The King and Queen wished to find
for her a man famous for knowledge and virtue, capable of ruling the
kingdom, and worthy of being the successor to the throne. So the
King called her and explained to her all his plans regarding her,
and how all his hopes rested on her.

"It is a crime," she replied, "for me not to comply with my father's
wishes; but you must pardon me if my ideas differ from yours."

"Tell me what your ideas are," said the King.      

"I do not wish to marry," she rejoined. "I wish to attain to perfection
and to Buddhahood. Then I promise that I will not be ungrateful
to you."

"Wretch of a daughter," cried the King in anger, "you think you can
teach me, the head of the State and ruler of so great a people! Has
anyone ever known a daughter of a king become a nun? Can a good woman
be found in that class? Put aside all these mad ideas of a nunnery,
and tell me at once if you will marry a First Academician or a Military
First Graduate."

"Who is there," answered the girl, "who does not love the royal
dignity?--what person who does not aspire to the happiness of
marriage? However, I wish to become a nun. With respect to the riches
and glory of this world, my heart is as cold as a dead cinder, and
I feel a keen desire to make it ever purer and purer."

The King rose in fury, and wished to cast her out from his
presence. Miao Shan, knowing she could not openly disobey his orders,
took another course. "If you absolutely insist upon my marrying,"
she said, "I will consent; only I must marry a physician."

"A physician!" growled the King. "Are men of good family and talents
wanting in my kingdom? What an absurd idea, to want to marry a
physician!"

"My wish is," said Miao Shan, "to heal humanity of all its ills; of
cold, heat, lust, old age, and all infirmities. I wish to equalize all
classes, putting rich and poor on the same footing, to have community
of goods, without distinction of persons. If you will grant me my wish,
I can still in this way become a Buddha, a Saviour of Mankind. There
is no necessity to call in the diviners to choose an auspicious day. I
am ready to be married now."









