The Peach-gathering








It is related of him that, not wishing to ascend to Heaven too soon,
he partook of only half of the pill of immortality, dividing the
other half among several of his admirers, and that he had at least two
selves or personalities, one of which used to disport itself in a boat
on a small lake in front of his house. The other self would receive
his visitors, entertaining them with food and drink and instructive
conversation. On one occasion this self said to them: "You are unable
to quit the world altogether as I can, but by imitating my example in
the matter of family relations you could procure a medicine which would
prolong your lives by several centuries. I have given the crucible
in which Huang Ti prepared the draught of immortality to my disciple
Wang Ch'ang. Later on, a man will come from the East, who also will
make use of it. He will arrive on the seventh day of the first moon."

Exactly on that day there arrived from the East a man named Chao
Sheng, who was the person indicated by Chang Tao-ling. He was
recognized by a manifestation of himself he had caused to appear
in advance of his coming. Chang then led all his disciples, to the
number of three hundred, to the highest peak of the Yuen-t'ai. Below
them they saw a peach-tree growing near a pointed rock, stretching
out its branches like arms above a fathomless abyss. It was a large
tree, covered with ripe fruit. Chang said to his disciples: "I will
communicate a spiritual formula to the one among you who will dare
to gather the fruit of that tree." They all leaned over to look,
but each declared the feat to be impossible. Chao Sheng alone had
the courage to rush out to the point of the rock and up the tree
stretching out into space. With firm foot he stood and gathered the
peaches, placing them in the folds of his cloak, as many as it would
hold, but when he wished to climb back up the precipitous slope,
his hands slipped on the smooth rock, and all his attempts were in
vain. Accordingly, he threw the peaches, three hundred and two in all,
one by one up to Chang Tao-ling, who distributed them. Each disciple
ate one, as also did Chang, who reserved the remaining one for Chao
Sheng, whom he helped to climb up again. To do this Chang extended
his arm to a length of thirty feet, all present marvelling at the
miracle. After Chao had eaten his peach Chang stood on the edge of
the precipice, and said with a laugh: "Chao Sheng was brave enough
to climb out to that tree and his foot never tripped. I too will make
the attempt. If I succeed I will have a big peach as a reward." Having
spoken thus, he leapt into space, and alighted in the branches of the
peach-tree. Wang Ch'ang and Chao Sheng also jumped into the tree and
stood one on each side of him. There Chang communicated to them the
mysterious formula. Three days later they returned to their homes;
then, having made final arrangements, they repaired once more to the
mountain peak, whence, in the presence of the other disciples, who
followed them with their eyes until they had completely disappeared
from view, all three ascended to Heaven in broad daylight.









