The Travellers Honoured








The pilgrims reached the capital of their country without further
difficulty. As soon as they appeared in sight the whole population
became greatly excited, and cutting down branches of willow-trees
went out to meet them. As a mark of special distinction the Emperor
sent his own horse for Hsuean Chuang to ride on, and the pilgrims were
escorted with royal honours into the city, where the Emperor and his
grateful Court were waiting to receive them. Hsuean Chuang's queer
trio of converts at first caused great amusement among the crowds
who thronged to see them, but when they learned of Sun's superhuman
achievements, and his brave defence of the Master, their amusement
was changed into wondering admiration.

But the greatest honours were conferred upon the travellers at
a meeting of the Immortals presided over by Mi-lo Fo, the Coming
Buddha. Addressing Hsuean Chuang, the Buddha said, "In a previous
existence you were one of my chief disciples. But for disobedience
and for lightly esteeming the great teaching your soul was imprisoned
in the Eastern Land. Now a memorial has been presented to me stating
that you have obtained the True Classics of Salvation, thus, by your
faithfulness, completing your meritorious labours. You are appointed
to the high office of Controller of Sacrifices to his Supreme Majesty
the Pearly Emperor."

Turning to Sun, the Buddha said, "You, Sun, for creating a disturbance
in the palace of Heaven, were imprisoned beneath the Mountain of
the Five Elements, until the fullness of Heaven's calamities had
descended upon you, and you had repented and had joined the holy
religion of Buddha. From that time you have endeavoured to suppress
evil and cherish virtue. And on your journey to the West you have
subjugated evil spirits, ghosts, and demons. For your services you
are appointed God of Victorious Strife."

For his repentance, and for his assistance to his Master, Chu Pa-chieh,
the Pig Fairy, was appointed Head Altar-washer to the Gods. This
was the highest office for which he was eligible, on account of his
inherent greed.
Sha Ho-shang was elevated to the rank of Golden Body Perpetual Saint.      
Pai Ma, the white horse who had patiently carried Hsuean Chuang and
his burden of books, was led by a god down the Spirit Mountain to
the banks of the Pool of Dragon-transformation. Pai Ma plunged in,
when he changed at once into a four-footed dragon, with horns, scales,
claws, and wings complete. From this time he became the chief of the
celestial dragon tribe.

Sun's first thought upon receiving his promotion was to get rid of the
Head-splitting Helmet. Accordingly he said to his Master, "Now that
I am, like yourself, a Buddha, I want you to relieve my head of the
helmet you imposed upon me during the years of my waywardness." Hsuean
Chuang replied, "If you have really become a Buddha, your helmet
should have disappeared of itself. Are you sure it is still upon your
head?" Sun raised his hand, and lo! the helmet was gone.

After this the great assembly broke up, and each of the Immortals
returned in peace to his own celestial abode.






