The Execution of Miao Shan








But the Queen, who had heard of this new plot, begged the King to grant
her daughter a last chance. "If you will give permission," she said,
"I will have a magnificent pavilion built at the side of the road
where Miao Shan will pass in chains on the way to her execution, and
will go there with our two other daughters and our sons-in-law. As
she passes we will have music, songs, feasting, everything likely
to impress her and make her contrast our luxurious life with her
miserable plight. This will surely bring her to repentance."

"I agree," said the King, "to counter-order her execution until your
preparations are complete." Nevertheless, when the time came, Miao
Shan showed nothing but disdain for all this worldly show, and to all
advances replied only: "I love not these pompous vanities; I swear
that I prefer death to the so-called joys of this world." She was then
led to the place of execution. All the Court was present. Sacrifices
were made to her as to one already dead. A Grand Minister pronounced
the sacrificial oration.

In the midst of all this the Queen appeared, and ordered the officials
to return to their posts, that she might once more exhort her daughter
to repent. But Miao Shan only listened in silence with downcast eyes.

The King felt great repugnance to shedding his daughter's blood, and
ordered her to be imprisoned in the palace, in order that he might make
a last effort to save her. "I am the King," he said; "my orders cannot
be lightly set aside. Disobedience to them involves punishment, and
in spite of my paternal love for you, if you persist in your present
attitude, you will be executed to-morrow in front of the palace gate."

The _t'u-ti_, hearing the King's verdict, went with all speed to Yue
Huang, and reported to him the sentence which had been pronounced
against Miao Shan. Yue Huang exclaimed: "Save Buddha, there is none in
the west so noble as this Princess. To-morrow, at the appointed hour,
go to the scene of execution, break the swords, and splinter the lances
they will use to kill her. See that she suffers no pain. At the moment
of her death transform yourself into a tiger, and bring her body to
the pine-wood. Having deposited it in a safe place, put a magic pill
in her mouth to arrest decay. Her triumphant soul on its return from
the lower regions must find it in a perfect state of preservation in
order to be able to re-enter it and animate it afresh. After that,
she must betake herself to Hsiang Shan on P'u T'o Island, where she
will reach the highest state of perfection."

On the day appointed, Commander Hu Pi-li led the condemned Princess
to the place of execution. A body of troops had been stationed
there to maintain order. The _t'u-ti_ was in attendance at the
palace gates. Miao Shan was radiant with joy. "To-day," she said,
"I leave the world for a better life. Hasten to take my life, but
beware of mutilating my body."

The King's warrant arrived, and suddenly the sky became overcast and
darkness fell upon the earth. A bright light surrounded Miao Shan,
and when the sword of the executioner fell upon the neck of the
victim it was broken in two. Then they thrust at her with a spear,
but the weapon fell to pieces. After that the King ordered that she be
strangled with a silken cord. A few moments later a tiger leapt into
the execution ground, dispersed the executioners, put the inanimate
body of Miao Shan on his back, and disappeared into the pine-forest. Hu
Pi-li rushed to the palace, recounted to the King full details of
all that had occurred, and received a reward of two ingots of gold.









