Shaving a Whole City








The summer had now arrived. On the road the pilgrims met an old
lady and a little boy. The old lady said: "You are priests; do not
go forward, for you are about to pass into the country known as the
Country that exterminates Religion. The inhabitants have vowed to
kill ten thousand priests. They have already slain that number all
but four noted ones whose arrival they expect; then their number will
be complete."

This old lady was Kuan Yin, with Shen Tsai (Steward), who had come to
give them warning. Sun thereupon changed himself into a candle-moth
and flew into the city to examine for himself. He entered an inn,
and heard the innkeeper warning his guests to look after their own
clothes and belongings when they went to sleep. In order to travel
safely through the city, Sun decided that they should all put on
turbans and clothing resembling that of the citizens. Perceiving
from the innkeeper's warning that thieving was common, Sun stole some
clothing and turbans for his Master and comrades. Then they all came
to the inn at dusk, Sun representing himself as a horse-dealer.

Fearing that in their sleep their turbans would fall off, and their
shaven heads be revealed, Sun arranged that they should sleep in a
cupboard, which he asked the landlady to lock.

During the night robbers came and carried the cupboard away, thinking
to find in it silver to buy horses. A watchman saw many men carrying
this cupboard, and became suspicious, and called out the soldiers. The
robbers ran away, leaving the cupboard in the open. The Master was very
angry with Sun for getting him into this danger. He feared that at
daylight they would be discovered and all be executed. But Sun said:
"Do not be alarmed; I will save you yet!" He changed himself into an
ant, and escaped from the cupboard. Then he plucked out some hairs
and changed them into a thousand monkeys like himself. To each he
gave a razor and a charm for inducing sleep. When the King and all
the officials and their wives had succumbed to this charm, the monkeys
were to shave their heads.

On the morrow there was a terrible commotion throughout the city,
as all the leaders and their families found themselves shaved like
Buddhists. Thus the Master was saved again.      







