A Test of Virtue








Just then Ju Lai Buddha appeared. "Why have you come to this place?" he
asked. Miao Shan explained why the King had put her to death, and
how after her descent into Hell her soul had re-entered her body. "I
greatly pity your misfortune," Ju Lai said, "but there is no one to
help you. I also am alone. Why should we not marry? We could build
ourselves a hut, and pass our days in peace. What say you?" "Sir,"
she replied, "you must not make impossible suggestions. I died and
came to life again. How can you speak so lightly? Do me the pleasure
of withdrawing from my presence."

"Well," said the visitor, "he to whom you are speaking is no other
than the Buddha of the West. I came to test your virtue. This place
is not suitable for your devotional exercises; I invite you to come
to Hsiang Shan."

Miao Shan threw herself on her knees and said: "My bodily eyes deceived
me. I never thought that your Majesty would come to a place like
this. Pardon my seeming want of respect. Where is this Hsiang Shan?"

"Hsiang Shan is a very old monastery," Ju Lai replied, "built in
the earliest historical times. It is inhabited by Immortals. It is
situated in the sea, on P'u T'o Island, a dependency of the kingdom
of Annam. There you will be able to reach the highest perfection."

"How far off is this island?" Miao Shan asked. "More than three
thousand _li_," Ju Lai replied. "I fear," she said, "I could not bear
the fatigue of so long a journey." "Calm yourself," he rejoined. "I
have brought with me a magic peach, of a kind not to be found in any
earthly orchard. Once you have eaten it, you will experience neither
hunger nor thirst; old age and death will have no power over you:
you will live for ever."

Miao Shan ate the magic peach, took leave of Ju Lai, and started
on the way to Hsiang Shan. From the clouds the Spirit of the North
Star saw her wending her way painfully toward P'u T'o. He called the
Guardian of the Soil of Hsiang Shan and said to him: "Miao Shan is
on her way to your country; the way is long and difficult. Do you
take the form of a tiger, and carry her to her journey's end."

The _t'u-ti_ transformed himself into a tiger and stationed himself
in the middle of the road along which Miao Shan must pass, giving
vent to ferocious roars.

"I am a poor girl devoid of filial piety," said Miao Shan when she
came up. "I have disobeyed my father's commands; devour me, and make
an end of me."

The tiger then spoke, saying: "I am not a real tiger, but the Guardian
of the Soil of Hsiang Shan. I have received instructions to carry
you there. Get on my back."

"Since you have received these instructions," said the girl, "I will
obey, and when I have attained to perfection I will not forget your
kindness."

The tiger went off like a flash of lightning, and in the twinkling
of an eye Miao Shan found herself at the foot of the rocky slopes of
P'u T'o Island.










