Miao Creation Legends








If the Miao have no written records, they have many legends in verse,
which they learn to repeat and sing. The Hei Miao (or Black Miao, so
called from their dark chocolate-coloured clothes) treasure poetical
legends of the Creation and of a deluge. These are composed in lines
of five syllables, in stanzas of unequal length, one interrogative
and one responsive. They are sung or recited by two persons or two
groups at feasts and festivals, often by a group of youths and a
group of maidens. The legend of the Creation commences:


    Who made Heaven and earth?
    Who made insects?
    Who made men?
    Made male and made female?
      I who speak don't know.




    Heavenly King made Heaven and earth,
    Ziene made insects,
    Ziene made men and demons,
    Made male and made female.
      How is it you don't know?



    How made Heaven and earth?
    How made insects?
    How made men and demons?
    Made male and made female?
      I who speak don't know.



    Heavenly King was intelligent,
    Spat a lot of spittle into his hand,
    Clapped his hands with a noise,
    Produced Heaven and earth,
    Tall grass made insects,
    Stories made men and demons,
    Made male and made female.
      How is it you don't know?



The legend proceeds to state how and by whom the heavens were
propped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its place, but the
continuation is exceedingly silly.

The legend of the Flood is another very silly composition, but it is
interesting to note that it tells of a great deluge. It commences:


    Who came to the bad disposition,
    To send fire and burn the hill?
    Who came to the bad disposition,
    To send water and destroy the earth?
      I who sing don't know.



    Zie did. Zie was of bad disposition,
    Zie sent fire and burned the hill;
    Thunder did. Thunder was of bad disposition,
    Thunder sent water and destroyed the earth.
      Why don't you know?


In this story of the flood only two persons were saved in a large
bottle gourd used as a boat, and these were A Zie and his sister. After
the flood the brother wished his sister to become his wife, but she
objected to this as not being proper. At length she proposed that
one should take the upper and one the nether millstone, and going to
opposite hills should set the stones rolling to the valley between. If
these should be found in the valley properly adjusted one above the
other she would be his wife, but not if they came to rest apart. The
young man, considering it unlikely that two stones thus rolled down
from opposite hills would be found in the valley one upon another,
while pretending to accept the test suggested, secretly placed two
other stones in the valley one upon the other. The stones rolled from
the hills were lost in the tall wild grass, and on descending into
the valley A Zie called his sister to come and see the stones he had
placed. She, however, was not satisfied, and suggested as another test
that each should take a knife from a double sheath and, going again
to the opposite hill-tops, hurl them into the valley below. If both
these knives were found in the sheath in the valley she would marry
him, but if the knives were found apart they would live apart. Again
the brother surreptitiously placed two knives in the sheath, and, the
experiment ending as A Zie wished, his sister became his wife. They
had one child, a misshapen thing without arms or legs, which A Zie
in great anger killed and cut to pieces. He threw the pieces all
over the hill, and next morning, on awaking, he found these pieces
transformed into men and women; thus the earth was repeopled.









