The Magic Circle








It was now winter. The pilgrims were crossing a high mountain by
a narrow pass, and the Master was afraid of wild beasts. The three
disciples bade him fear not, as they were united, and were all good
men seeking truth. Being cold and hungry they rejoiced to see a fine
building ahead of them, but Sun said: "It is another devil's trap. I
will make a ring round you. Inside that you will be safe. Do not wander
outside it. I will go and look for food." Sun returned with his bowl
full of rice, but found that his companions had got tired of waiting,
and had disappeared. They had gone forward to the fine building, which
Pa-chieh entered. Not a soul was to be seen, but on going upstairs
he was terrified to see a human skeleton of immense size lying on
the floor. At this moment the Demon of the house descended on them,
bound the Master, and said: "We have been told that if we eat of your
flesh our white hair will become black again, and our lost teeth grow
anew." So he ordered the small devils who accompanied him to bind the
others. This they did, and thrust the pilgrims into a cave, and then
lay in wait for Sun. It was not long before the Monkey came up, when
a great fight ensued. In the end, having failed, notwithstanding the
exercise of numerous magic arts, to release his companions, Sun betook
himself to the Spiritual Mountain and besought Ju Lai's aid. Eighteen
_lohan_ were sent to help him against the Demon. When Sun renewed the
attack, the _lohan_ threw diamond dust into the air, which blinded the
Demon and also half buried him. But, by skilful use of his magic coil,
he gathered up all the diamond dust and carried it back to his cave.

The _lohan_ then advised Sun to seek the aid of the Ancient of
Days. Accordingly, Sun ascended to the thirty-third Heaven, where
was the palace of the god. He there discovered that the Demon was
none other than one of the god's ox-spirits who had stolen the magic
coil. It was, in fact, the same coil with which Sun himself had at
last been subdued when he had rebelled against Heaven.









