He returns Home








As he neared the capital the King and Queen, dressed in mourning, were
awaiting the bier in tears. The Princess, after a posthumous title
had been conferred upon her, was buried with great magnificence a few
miles to the east of the city, while Ch'un-yue remained in the capital,
living in such state, and gaining so much influence, that he excited
the King's jealousy; and when it was foretold, by means of signs in
the heavens, that ruin threatened the kingdom, that its inhabitants
would be swept away, and that this would be the work of an alien,
the prophecy seemed to point to ambitious designs on the part of
Ch'un-yue, and means were taken to keep him under restraint.

Ch'un-yue, conscious that he had faithfully filled a high office for
many years, felt greatly grieved by these calumnies--a result which
the King could not avoid noticing. He accordingly sent for Ch'un-yue,
and said: "For more than twenty years we have been connexions,
although my poor daughter, unfortunately, has not been spared to be
a companion to you in old age. Her mother is now taking care of her
children; your own home you have not seen for many years; return to
see your friends; your children will be looked after, and in three
years you will see them again." "Is not this my home? Whither else am
I to go?" was Ch'un-yue's reply. "My friend," the King said laughingly,
"you are a human being; you don't belong to this place." At these words
Ch'un-yue seemed to fall into a deep swoon, and he remained unconscious
for some time, after which he began to recall some glimpses of the
distant past. With tears in his eyes he begged that he might be
allowed to return to his home, and, saying farewell, he departed.

Outside the palace he found the same two officials in purple clothes
who had led the way so many years ago. A conveyance was also there,
but this time it was a mere bullock-cart, with no outriders. He took
the same road as before, and noticed the same hills and streams. The
two officials were by no means imposing this time, and when he asked
how far was his destination they continued to hum and whistle and
paid no attention to him. At last they passed through an opening, and
he recognized his own village, precisely as he had left it. The two
officials desired him to get down and walk up the steps before him,
where, much to his horror, he saw himself lying down in the porch. He
was too much bedazed with terror to advance, but the two officials
called out his name several times, and upon this he awoke. The
servants were bustling about the house, and his two companions
were still washing their feet. Everything was as he had left it,
and the lifetime he had lived in his dream had occupied only a few
moments. Calling out to his two friends, he made them follow him to
the locust-tree, and pointed out the opening through which he had
begun his journey in dream-land.

An axe was sent for, and the interior of the trunk thrown open,
whereupon a series of galleries was laid bare. At the root of the
tree a mound of earth was discovered, in shape like a city, and
swarming with ants. This was the capital of the kingdom in which
he had lived in his dream. A terrace surrounded by a guard of ants
was the residence of the King and Queen, two winged insects with
red heads. Twenty feet or so along another gallery was found an
old tortoise-shell covered with a thick growth of moss; it was the
Tortoise-back Hill of the dream. In another direction was found a
small mound of earth round which was coiled a root in shape like a
dragon's tongue; it was the grave of the King's daughter, Ch'un-yue's
wife in the vision. As he recalled each incident of the dream he was
much affected at discovering its counterpart in this nest of ants,
and he refused to allow his companions to disturb it further. They
replaced everything as they had found it; but that night a storm of
wind and rain came, and next morning not a vestige of the ants was
to be seen. They had all disappeared, and here was the fulfilment of
the warning in the dream, that the kingdom would be swept away.









