The God of Literature








In addition to the ancestors of whose worship it really consists,
Confucianism has in its pantheon the specialized gods worshipped by
the _literati_. Naturally the chief of these is Wen Ch'ang, the God of
Literature. The account of him (which varies in several particulars
in different Chinese works) relates that he was a man of the name
of Chang Ya, who was born during the T'ang dynasty in the kingdom of
Yueeh (modern Chekiang), and went to live at Tzu T'ung in Ssuch'uan,
where his intelligence raised him to the position of President of the
Board of Ceremonies. Another account refers to him as Chang Ya Tzu,
the Soul or Spirit of Tzu T'ung, and states that he held office in the
Chin dynasty (A.D. 265-316), and was killed in a fight. Another again
states that under the Sung dynasty (A.D. 960-1280), in the third year
(A.D. 1000) of the reign-period Hsien P'ing of the Emperor Chen Tsung,
he repressed the revolt of Wang Chuen at Ch'eng Tu in Ssuch'uan. General
Lei Yu-chung caused to be shot into the besieged town arrows to which
notices were attached inviting the inhabitants to surrender. Suddenly
a man mounted a ladder, and pointing to the rebels cried in a loud
voice: "The Spirit of Tzu T'ung has sent me to inform you that the
town will fall into the hands of the enemy on the twentieth day of
the ninth moon, and not a single person will escape death." Attempts
to strike down this prophet of evil were in vain, for he had already
disappeared. The town was captured on the day indicated. The general,
as a reward, caused the temple of Tzu T'ung's Spirit to be repaired,
and sacrifices offered to it.

The object of worship nowadays in the temples dedicated to Wen Ch'ang
is Tzu T'ung Ti Chuen, the God of Tzu T'ung. The convenient elasticity
of dualism enabled Chang to have as many as seventeen reincarnations,
which ranged over a period of some three thousand years.

Various emperors at various times bestowed upon Wen Ch'ang honorific
titles, until ultimately, in the Yuean, or Mongol, dynasty, in the reign
Yen Yu, in A.D. 1314, the title was conferred on him of Supporter of
the Yuean Dynasty, Diffuser of Renovating Influences, Ssu-lu of Wen
Ch'ang, God and Lord. He was thus apotheosized, and took his place
among the gods of China. By steps few or many a man in China has
often become a god.









