He takes Office








One day Ch'un-yue's wife asked him if he would not like to hold
office. His answer was to the effect that he had always been a rolling
stone, and had no experience of official affairs, but the Princess
promised to give him her assistance, and found occasion to speak on the
subject to her father. In consequence the King one day told Ch'un-yue
that he was not satisfied with the state of affairs in the south of his
territory, that the present governor was old and useless, and that he
would be pleased if he would proceed thither. Ch'un-yue bowed to the
King's commands, and inwardly congratulated himself that such good
fortune should have befallen a rover like him. He was supplied with a
splendid outfit, and farewell entertainments were given in his honour.

Before leaving he acknowledged to the King that he had no great
confidence in his own powers, and suggested that he should be allowed
to take with him Chou-pien and Tzu-hua as commissioners of justice
and finance. The King gave his consent, and issued the necessary
instructions. The day of departure having arrived, both the King
and the Queen came to see Ch'un-yue and his wife off, and to Ch'un-yue
the King said: "The province of Nan-k'o is rich and fertile; and the
inhabitants are brave and prosperous; it is by kindness that you must
rule them." To her daughter the Queen said: "Your husband is violent
and fond of wine. The duty of a wife is to be kind and submissive. Act
well toward him, and I shall have no anxiety. Nan-k'o, it is true,
is not very far--only one day's journey; still, in parting from
you my tears will flow." Ch'un-yue and his bride waved a farewell,
and were whirled away toward their destination, reaching Nan-k'o the
same evening.

Once settled in the place, Ch'un-yue set himself to become thoroughly
acquainted with the manners and customs of the people, and to relieve
distress. To Chou-pien and Tzu-hua he confided all questions of
administration, and in the course of twenty years a great improvement
was to be noticed in the affairs of the province. The people showed
their appreciation by erecting a monument to his honour, while the
King conferred upon him an estate and the dignity of a title, and in
recognition of their services promoted Chou-pien and Tzu-hua to very
high posts. Ch'un-yue's children also shared their father's rewards;
the two sons were given office, while the two daughters were betrothed
to members of the royal family. There remained nothing which could
add to his fame and greatness.









