The Alchemist








At Ch'ang-an there lived a scholar named Chia Tzu-lung, who one day
noticed a very refined-looking stranger; and, on making inquiries
about him, learned that he was a Mr Chen who had taken lodgings
hard by. Accordingly, Chia called next day and sent in his card,
but did not see Chen, who happened to be out at the time. The same
thing occurred thrice; and at length Chia engaged some one to watch
and let him know when Mr Chen was at home. However, even then the
latter would not come forth to receive his guest, and Chia had to
go in and rout him out. The two now entered into conversation, and
soon became mutually charmed with each other; and by and by Chia sent
off a servant to bring wine from a neighbouring wine-shop. Mr Chen
proved himself a pleasant boon-companion, and when the wine was nearly
finished he went to a box and took from it some wine-cups and a large
and beautiful jade tankard; into the latter he poured a single cup of
wine, and immediately it was filled to the brim. They then proceeded
to help themselves from the tankard; but however much they took out,
the contents never seemed to diminish. Chia was astonished at this,
and begged Mr Chen to tell him how it was done. "Ah," replied Mr Chen,
"I tried to avoid making your acquaintance solely because of your
one bad quality--avarice. The art I practise is a secret known to
the Immortals only: how can I divulge it to you?" "You do me wrong,"
rejoined Chia, "in thus attributing avarice to me. The avaricious,
indeed, are always poor." Mr Chen laughed, and they separated for that
day; but from that time they were constantly together, and all ceremony
was laid aside between them. Whenever Chia wanted money Mr Chen would
bring out a black stone, and, muttering a charm, would rub it on a tile
or a brick, which was forthwith changed into a lump of silver. This
silver he would give to Chia, and it was always just as much as he
actually required, neither more nor less; and if ever the latter asked
for more Mr Chen would rally him on the subject of avarice. Finally
Chia determined to try to get possession of this stone; and one day,
when Mr Chen was sleeping off the fumes of a drinking-bout, he tried
to extract it from his clothes. However, Chen detected him at once,
and declared that they could be friends no more, and next day he
left the place altogether. About a year afterward Chia was one day
wandering by the river-bank, when he saw a handsome-looking stone,
marvellously like that in the possession of Mr Chen; and he picked
it up at once and carried it home with him. A few days passed away,
and suddenly Mr Chen presented himself at Chia's house, and explained
that the stone in question possessed the property of changing anything
into gold, and had been bestowed upon him long before by a certain
Taoist priest whom he had followed as a disciple. "Alas!" added he,
"I got tipsy and lost it; but divination told me where it was,
and if you will now restore it to me I will take care to repay your
kindness." "You have divined rightly," replied Chia; "the stone is
with me; but recollect, if you please, that the indigent Kuan Chung
 shared the wealth of his friend Pao Shu." At this hint Mr Chen
said he would give Chia one hundred ounces of silver; to which the
latter replied that one hundred ounces was a fair offer, but that he
would far sooner have Mr Chen teach him the formula to utter when
rubbing the stone on anything, so that he might try the thing once
himself. Mr Chen was afraid to do this; whereupon Chia cried out,
"You are an Immortal yourself; you must know well enough that I
would never deceive a friend." So Mr Chen was prevailed upon to
teach him the formula, and then Chia would have tried the art upon
the immense stone washing-block  which was lying near at hand
had not Mr Chen seized his arm and begged him not to do anything
so outrageous. Chia then picked up half a brick and laid it on the
washing-block, saying to Mr Chen, "This little piece is not too much,
surely?" Accordingly Mr Chen relaxed his hold and let Chia proceed;
which he did by promptly ignoring the half-brick and quickly rubbing
the stone on the washing-block. Mr Chen turned pale when he saw him
do this, and made a dash forward to get hold of the stone, but it was
too late; the washing-block was already a solid mass of silver, and
Chia quietly handed him back the stone. "Alas! alas!" cried Mr Chen
in despair, "what is to be done now? For, having thus irregularly
conferred wealth upon a mortal, Heaven will surely punish me. Oh,
if you would save me, give away one hundred coffins  and one
hundred suits of wadded clothes." "My friend," replied Chia, "my
object in getting money was not to hoard it up like a miser." Mr
Chen was delighted at this; and during the next three years Chia
engaged in trade, taking care to fulfil always his promise to Mr
Chen. At the expiration of that time Mr Chen himself reappeared, and,
grasping Chia's hand, said to him, "Trustworthy and noble friend,
when we last parted the Spirit of Happiness impeached me before God,
 and my name was erased from the list of angels. But now that you
have carried out my request that sentence has been rescinded. Go on
as you have begun, without ceasing." Chia asked Mr Chen what office
he filled in Heaven; to which the latter replied that he was only
a fox who, by a sinless life, had finally attained to that clear
perception of the truth which leads to immortality. Wine was then
brought, and the two friends enjoyed themselves together as of old;
and even when Chia had passed the age of ninety years the fox still
used to visit him from time to time.









