Blue Dragon and White Tiger








The functions discharged by Heng and Ha at the gates of Buddhist
temples are in Taoist temples discharged by Blue Dragon and White
Tiger.

The former, the Spirit of the Blue Dragon Star, was Teng Chiu-kung,
one of the chief generals of the last emperor of the Yin dynasty. He
had a son named Teng Hsiu, and a daughter named Ch'an-yue.

The army of Teng Chiu-kung was camped at San-shan Kuan, when he
received orders to proceed to the battle then taking place at Hsi
Ch'i. There, in standing up to No-cha and Huang Fei-hu, he had his
left arm broken by the former's magic bracelet, but, fortunately for
him, his subordinate, T'u Hsing-sun, a renowned magician, gave him
a remedy which quickly healed the fracture.

His daughter then came on the scene to avenge her father. She had a
magic weapon, the Five-fire Stone, which she hurled full in the face
of Yang Chien. But the Immortal was not wounded; on the other hand,
his celestial dog jumped at Ch'an-yue and bit her neck, so that she
was obliged to flee. T'u Hsing-sun, however, healed the wound.

After a banquet, Teng Chiu-kung promised his daughter in marriage to
T'u Hsing-sun if he would gain him the victory at Hsi Ch'i. Chiang
Tzu-ya then persuaded T'u's magic master, Chue Liu-sun, to call his
disciple over to his camp, where he asked him why he was fighting
against the new dynasty. "Because," he replied, "Chiu-kung has promised
me his daughter in marriage as a reward of success." Chiang Tzu-ya
thereupon promised to obtain the bride, and sent a force to seize
her. As a result of the fighting that ensued, Chiu-kung was beaten,
and retreated in confusion, leaving Ch'an-yue in the hands of the
victors. During the next few days the marriage was celebrated with
great ceremony in the victor's camp. According to custom, the bride
returned for some days to her father's house, and while there she
earnestly exhorted Chiu-kung to submit. Following her advice, he went
over to Chiang Tzu-ya's party.

In the ensuing battles he fought valiantly on the side of his former
enemy, and killed many famous warriors, but he was eventually attacked
by the Blower, from whose mouth a column of yellow gas struck him,
throwing him from his steed. He was made prisoner, and executed by
order of General Ch'iu Yin. Chiang Tzu-ya conferred on him the kingdom
of the Blue Dragon Star.

The Spirit of the White Tiger Star is Yin Ch'eng-hsiu. His father,
Yin P'o-pai, a high courtier of the tyrant Chou Wang, was sent to
negotiate peace with Chiang Tzu-ya, but was seized and put to death by
Marquis Chiang Wen-huan. His son, attempting to avenge his father's
murder, was pierced by a spear, and his head was cut off and carried
in triumph to Chiang Tzu-ya.

As compensation he was, though somewhat tardily, canonized as the
Spirit of the White Tiger Star.









