The City is Founded








When sufficient money had been subscribed, a propitious day was chosen
on which to commence the undertaking. Trenches where the foundations
of the walls were to be were first dug out, according to the plan
found in the packet. The foundations themselves consisted of layers
of stone quarried from the western hills; bricks of an immense size
were made and burnt in the neighbourhood; the moat was dug out, and
the earth from it used to fill in the centre of the walls, which,
when complete, were forty-eight _li_ in circumference, fifty cubits in
height, and fifty in breadth; the whole circuit of the walls having
battlements and embrasures. Above each of the nine gates of the city
immense three-storied towers were built, each tower being ninety-nine
cubits in height.

Near the front entrance of the city, facing each other, were built the
Temples of Heaven and of Earth. In rear of it the beautiful 'Coal Hill'
(better known as 'Prospect Hill') was raised; while in the square in
front of the Great Gate of the palace was buried an immense quantity
of charcoal (that and the coal being stored as a precaution in case
of siege).

The palace, containing many superb buildings, was built in a style of
exceeding splendour; in the various enclosures were beautiful gardens
and lakes; in the different courtyards, too, seventy-two wells were
dug and thirty-six golden tanks placed. The whole of the buildings
and grounds was surrounded by a lofty wall and a stone-paved moat,
in which the lotus and other flowers bloomed in great beauty and
profusion, and in the clear waters of which myriads of gold and silver
fish disported themselves.

The geomancy of the city was similar to that of Chin-ling, When
everything was completed the Prince compared it with the plan and
found that the city tallied with it in every respect. He was much
delighted, and called for the ten wealthy persons who had been
the chief contributors, and gave each of them a pair of 'couchant
dragon' silk- or satin-embroidered cuffs, and allowed them great
privileges. Up to the present time there is the common saying:
"Since then the 'dragon-cuffed' gentlefolks have flourished."









