Ts'an Nue








In the kingdom of Shu (modern Ssuch'uan), in the time of Kao Hsing
Ti, a band of robbers kidnapped the father of Ts'an Nue. A whole year
elapsed, and the father's horse still remained in the stable as he
had left it. The thought of not seeing her father again caused Ts'an
Nue such grief that she would take no nourishment. Her mother did
what she could to console her, and further promised her in marriage
to anyone who would bring back her father. But no one was found who
could do this. Hearing the offer, the horse stamped with impatience,
and struggled so much that at length he broke the halter by which
he was tied up. He then galloped away and disappeared. Several days
later, his owner returned riding the horse. From that time the horse
neighed incessantly, and refused all food. This caused the mother
to make known to her husband the promise she had made concerning her
daughter. "An oath made to men," he replied, "does not hold good for
a horse. Is a human being meant to live in marital relations with
a horse?" Nevertheless, however good and abundant food they offered
him, the horse would not eat. When he saw the young lady he plunged
and kicked furiously. Losing his temper, the father discharged an
arrow and killed him on the spot; then he skinned him and spread the
skin on the ground outside the house to dry. As the young lady was
passing the spot the skin suddenly moved, rose up, enveloped her,
and disappeared into space. Ten days later it was found at the foot
of a mulberry-tree; Ts'an Nue changed into a silkworm, was eating the
mulberry-leaves, and spinning for herself a silken garment.

The parents of course were in despair. But one day, while they were
overwhelmed with sad thoughts, they saw on a cloud Ts'an Nue riding
the horse and attended by several dozens of servants. She descended
toward her parents, and said to them: "The Supreme Being, as a reward
for my martyrdom in the cause of filial piety and my love of virtue,
has conferred on me the dignity of Concubine of the Nine Palaces. Be
reassured as to my fate, for in Heaven I shall live for ever." Having
said this she disappeared into space.

In the temples her image is to be seen covered with a horse's
skin. She is called Ma-t'ou Niang, 'the Lady with the Horse's
Head,' and is prayed to for the prosperity of mulberry-trees and
silkworms. The worship continues even in modern times. The goddess
is also represented as a stellar divinity, the star T'ien Ssu; as
the first man who reared silkworms, in this character bearing the
same name as the God of Agriculture, Pasture, and Fire; and as the
wife of the Emperor Huang Ti.









