The Oath in the Peach-orchard








Another account represents Liu Pei and Chang Fei as having entered
a village inn to drink wine, when a man of gigantic stature pushing
a wheelbarrow stopped at the door to rest. As he seated himself,
he hailed the waiter, saying: "Bring me some wine quickly, because
I have to hasten to reach the town to enlist in the army."

Liu Pei looked at this man, nine feet in height, with a beard two feet
long. His face was the colour of the fruit of the jujube-tree, and
his lips carmine. Eyebrows like sleeping silkworms shaded his phoenix
eyes, which were a scarlet red. Terrible indeed was his bearing.

"What is your name?" asked Liu Pei. "My family name is Kuan, my own
name is Yue, my surname Yuen Chang," he replied. "I am from the Ho Tung
country. For the last five or six years I have been wandering about
the world as a fugitive, to escape from my pursuers, because I killed
a powerful man of my country who was oppressing the poor people. I
hear that they are collecting a body of troops to crush the brigands,
and I should like to join the expedition."

Chang Fei, also named Chang I Te, is described as eight feet in
height, with round shining eyes in a panther's head, and a pointed
chin bristling with a tiger's beard. His voice resembled the rumbling
of thunder. His ardour was like that of a fiery steed. He was a native
of Cho Chuen, where he possessed some fertile farms, and was a butcher
and wine-merchant.

Liu Pei, surnamed Hsuean Te, otherwise Hsien Chu, was the third member
of the group.

The three men went to Chang Fei's farm, and on the morrow met together
in his peach-orchard, and sealed their friendship with an oath. Having
procured a black ox and a white horse, with the various accessories
to a sacrifice, they immolated the victims, burnt the incense of
friendship, and after twice prostrating themselves took this oath:

"We three, Liu Pei, Kuan Yu, and Chang Fei, already united by mutual
friendship, although belonging to different clans, now bind ourselves
by the union of our hearts, and join our forces in order to help each
other in times of danger.

"We wish to pay to the State our debt of loyal citizens and give peace
to our black-haired compatriots. We do not inquire if we were born
in the same year, the same month, or on the same day, but we desire
only that the same year, the same month, and the same day may find us
united in death. May Heaven our King and Earth our Queen see clearly
our hearts! If any one of us violate justice or forget benefits,
may Heaven and Man unite to punish him!"

The oath having been formally taken, Liu Pei was saluted as elder
brother, Kuan Yue as the second, and Chang Fei as the youngest. Their
sacrifice to Heaven and earth ended, they killed an ox and served
a feast, to which the soldiers of the district were invited to the
number of three hundred or more. They all drank copiously until they
were intoxicated. Liu Pei enrolled the peasants; Chang Fei procured
for them horses and arms; and then they set out to make war on the
Yellow Turbans (Huang Chin Tsei). Kuan Yue proved himself worthy
of the affection which Liu Pei showed him; brave and generous, he
never turned aside from danger. His fidelity was shown especially
on one occasion when, having been taken prisoner by Ts'ao Ts'ao,
together with two of Liu Pei's wives, and having been allotted a common
sleeping-apartment with his fellow-captives, he preserved the ladies'
reputation and his own trustworthiness by standing all night at the
door of the room with a lighted lantern in his hand.

Into details of the various exploits of the three Brothers of the
Peach-orchard we need not enter here. They are written in full in the
book of the _Story of the Three Kingdoms_, a romance in which every
Chinese who can read takes keen delight. Kuan Yue remained faithful to
his oath, even though tempted with a marquisate by the great Ts'ao
Ts'ao, but he was at length captured by Sun Ch'uean and put to death
(A.D. 219). Long celebrated as the most renowned of China's military
heroes, he was ennobled in A.D. 1120 as Faithful and Loyal Duke. Eight
years later he had conferred on him by letters patent the still more
glorious title of Magnificent Prince and Pacificator. The Emperor Wen
(A.D. 1330-3) of the Yuean dynasty added the appellation Warrior Prince
and Civilizer, and, finally, the Emperor Wan Li of the Ming dynasty,
in 1594, conferred on him the title of Faithful and Loyal Great _Ti_,
Supporter of Heaven and Protector of the Kingdom. He thus became a god,
a _ti_, and has ever since received worship as Kuan Ti or Wu Ti, the
God of War. Temples (1600 State temples and thousands of smaller ones)
erected in his honour are to be seen in all parts of the country. He
is one of the most popular gods of China. During the last half-century
of the Manchu Period his fame greatly increased. In 1856 he is said
to have appeared in the heavens and successfully turned the tide of
battle in favour of the Imperialists. His portrait hangs in every tent,
but his worship is not confined to the officials and the army, for
many trades and professions have elected him as a patron saint. The
sword of the public executioner used to be kept within the precincts
of his temple, and after an execution the presiding magistrate would
stop there to worship for fear the ghost of the criminal might follow
him home. He knew that the spirit would not dare to enter Kuan Ti's
presence.

Thus the Chinese have no fewer than three gods of literature--perhaps
not too many for so literary a people. A fourth, a Taoist god, will
be mentioned later.









