The Marriage of the River-god








In Yeh Hsien there was a witch and some official attendants who
collected money from the people yearly for the marriage of the
River-god.

The witch would select a pretty girl of low birth, and say that she
should be the Queen of the River-god. The girl was bathed, and clothed
in a beautiful dress of gay and costly silk. She was then taken to
the bank of the river, to a monastery which was beautifully decorated
with scrolls and banners. A feast was held, and the girl was placed
on a bed which was floated out upon the tide till it disappeared
under the waters.

Many families having beautiful daughters moved to distant places,
and gradually the city became deserted. The common belief in Yeh was
that if no queen was offered to the River-god a flood would come and
drown the people.

One day Hsi-men Pao, Magistrate of Yeh Hsien, said to his attendants:
"When the marriage of the River-god takes place I wish to say farewell
to the chosen girl."

Accordingly Hsi-men Pao was present to witness the ceremony. About
three thousand people had come together. Standing beside the old
witch were ten of her female disciples, "Call the girl out," said
Hsi-men Pao. After seeing her, Hsi-men Pao said to the witch: "She
is not fair. Go you to the River-god and tell him that we will find
a fairer maid and present her to him later on." His attendants then
seized the witch and threw her into the river.

After a little while Hsi-men Pao said: "Why does she stay so long? Send
a disciple to call her back." One of the disciples was thrown into the
river. Another and yet another followed. The magistrate then said:"
The witches are females and therefore cannot bring me a reply." So
one of the official attendants of the witch was thrown into the river.

Hsi-men Pao stood on the bank for a long time, apparently awaiting
a reply. The spectators were alarmed. Hsi-men Pao then bade his
attendants send the remaining disciples of the witch and the other
official attendants to recall their mistress. The wretches threw
themselves on their knees and knocked their heads on the ground,
which was stained with the blood from their foreheads, and with tears
confessed their sin.

"The River-god detains his guest too long," said Hsi-men Pao at
length. "Let us adjourn."

Thereafter none dared to celebrate the marriage of the River-god.      







