Snorter and Blower








At the time of the overthrow of the Shang and establishment of the Chou
dynasty in 1122 B.C. there lived two marshals, Cheng Lung and Ch'en
Ch'i. These were Heng and Ha, the Snorter and Blower respectively.

The former was the chief superintendent of supplies for the armies of
the tyrant emperor Chou, the Nero of China. The latter was in charge
of the victualling department of the same army.

From his master, Tu O, the celebrated Taoist magician of the K'un-lun
Mountains, Heng acquired a marvellous power. When he snorted, his
nostrils, with a sound like that of a bell, emitted two white columns
of light, which destroyed his enemies, body and soul. Thus through him
the Chou gained numerous victories. But one day he was captured, bound,
and taken to the general of Chou. His life was spared, and he was
made general superintendent of army stores as well as generalissimo
of five army corps. Later on he found himself face to face with the
Blower. The latter had learnt from the magician how to store in his
chest a supply of yellow gas which, when he blew it out, annihilated
anyone whom it struck. By this means he caused large gaps to be made
in the ranks of the enemy.

Being opposed to each other, the one snorting out great streaks of
white light, the other blowing streams of yellow gas, the combat
continued until the Blower was wounded in the shoulder by No-cha,
of the army of Chou, and pierced in the stomach with a spear by Huang
Fei-hu, Yellow Flying Tiger.

The Snorter in turn was slain in this fight by Marshal Chin Ta-sheng,
'Golden Big Pint,' who was an ox-spirit and endowed with the mysterious
power of producing in his entrails the celebrated _niu huang_,
ox-yellow, or bezoar. Facing the Snorter, he spat in his face, with
a noise like thunder, a piece of bezoar as large as a rice-bowl. It
struck him on the nose and split his nostrils. He fell to the earth,
and was immediately cut in two by a blow from his victor's sword.

After the Chou dynasty had been definitely established Chiang Tzu-ya
canonized the two marshals Heng and Ha, and conferred on them the
offices of guardians of the Buddhist temple gates, where their gigantic
images may be seen.









