Mr Redcoat








The other is dedicated to Chu I, 'Mr Redcoat.' He and K'uei Hsing
are represented as the two inseparable companions of the God of
Literature. The legend related of Chu I is as follows:

During the T'ang dynasty, in the reign-period Chien Chung (A.D. 780-4)
of the Emperor Te Tsung, the Princess T'ai Yin noticed that Lu Ch'i,
a native of Hua Chou, had the bones of an Immortal, and wished to
marry him.

Ma P'o, her neighbour, introduced him one day into the Crystal
Palace for an interview with his future wife. The Princess gave him
the choice of three careers: to live in the Dragon Prince's Palace,
with the guarantee of immortal life, to enjoy immortality among the
people on the earth, or to have the honour of becoming a minister of
the Empire. Lu Ch'i first answered that he would like to live in the
Crystal Palace. The young lady, overjoyed, said to him: "I am Princess
T'ai Yin. I will at once inform Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler." A moment
later the arrival of a celestial messenger was announced. Two officers
bearing flags preceded him and conducted him to the foot of the flight
of steps. He then presented himself as Chu I, the envoy of Shang Ti.

Addressing himself to Lu Ch'i, he asked: "Do you wish to live in the
Crystal Palace?" The latter did not reply. T'ai Yin urged him to give
his answer, but he persisted in keeping silent. The Princess in despair
retired to her apartment, and brought out five pieces of precious
cloth, which she presented to the divine envoy, begging him to have
patience a little longer and wait for the answer. After some time,
Chu I repeated his question. Then Lu Ch'i in a firm voice answered:
"I have consecrated my life to the hard labour of study, and wish to
attain to the dignity of minister on this earth."

T'ai Yin ordered Ma P'o to conduct Lu Ch'i from the palace. From that
day his face became transformed: he acquired the lips of a dragon,
the head of a panther, the green face of an Immortal, etc. He took
his degree, and was promoted to be Director of the Censorate. The
Emperor, appreciating the good sense shown in his advice, appointed
him a minister of the Empire.

From this legend it would seem that Chu I is the purveyor of official
posts; however, in practice, he is more generally regarded as the
protector of weak candidates, as the God of Good Luck for those who
present themselves at the examinations with a somewhat light equipment
of literary knowledge. The special legend relating to this _role_
is known everywhere in China. It is as follows:









