The Slaying of the Dragon-king's Son








"How is it that the officer does not return?" inquired Lung Wang. At
that moment attendants came to inform him that his retainer had been
murdered by a boy.

Thereupon Ao Ping, the third son of Lung Wang, placing himself at the
head of a troop of marines, his trident in his hand, left the palace
precincts. The warriors dashed into the river, raising on every side
waves mountains high. Seeing the water rising, No-cha stood up on
the rock and was confronted by Ao Ping mounted on a sea-monster.

"Who slew my messenger?" cried the warrior.      

"I did," answered No-cha.     

"Who are you?" demanded Ao Ping.      

"I am No-cha, the third son of Li Ching of Ch'en-t'ang Kuan. I came
here to bathe and refresh myself; your messenger cursed me, and I
killed him. Then--"

"Rascal! do you not know that your victim was a deputy of the King
of Heaven? How dare you kill him, and then boast of your crime?"

So saying, Ao Ping thrust at the boy with his trident. No-cha, by a
brisk move, evaded the thrust.

"Who are you?" he asked in turn.      

"I am Ao Ping, the third son of Lung Wang."     

"Ah, you are a blusterer," jeered the boy; "if you dare to touch me
I will skin you alive, you and your mud-eels!"

"You make me choke with rage," rejoined Ao Ping, at the same time
thrusting again with his trident.

Furious at this renewed attack, No-cha spread his silk trousers in
the air, and thousands of balls of fire flew out of them, felling Lung
Wang's son. No-cha put his foot on Ao Ping's head and struck it with
his magic bracelet, whereupon he appeared in his true form of a dragon.

"I am now going to pull out your sinews," he said, "in order to make
a belt for my father to use to bind on his cuirass."

No-cha was as good as his word, and Ao Ping's escort ran and informed
Lung Wang of the fate of his son. The Dragon-king went to Li Ching
and demanded an explanation.

Being entirely ignorant of what had taken place, Li Ching sought
No-cha to question him.









